# postFireSeverityAssessment


A Project for monitoring Trends in Burn Severity
Elected officials and leaders of environmental agencies need information about the effects of largewildfires in order to set policy and make management decisions. Recently, the Wildland FireLeadership Council (WFLC), which implements and coordinates the National Fire Plan (NFP)and Federal Wildland Fire Management Policies (National Fire Plan, 2004), adopted a strategyto monitor the effectiveness of the National Fire Plan and the Healthy Forests Restoration Act(HFRA). One component of this strategy is to assess the environmental impacts of large wildlandfires and identify the trends of burn severity on all lands across the United States.

To that end, WFLC has sponsored a six year project, Monitoring Trends in Burn Severity (MTBS),which requires the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service (USDA-FS) and the U.S.Geological Survey (USGS) to map and assess the burn severity for all large current and historicalfires. Using Landsat data and the differenced Normalized Burn Ratio (dNBR) algorithm, the USGSCenter for Earth Resources Observation and Science (EROS) and USDA-FS Remote SensingApplications Center will map burn severity of all fires since 1984 greater than 500 acres in the east,and 1000 acres in the west. The number of historical fires from this period combined with currentfires occurring during the course of the project will exceed 9000.

The MTBS project will generate burn severity data, maps, and reports which will be availablefor use at local, state, and national levels to evaluate trends in burn severity and help develop andassess the effectiveness of land management decisions. Additionally, the information developedwill provide a baseline from which to monitor the recovery and health of fire-affected landscapesover time. Spatial and tabular data quantifying burn severity will augment existing informationused to estimate risk associated with a range of current and future resource threats. The annualreport of 2004 fires has been completed. All data and results will be distributed to the public on aWeb site.

Keywords: burn severity, fire atlas, monitoring, normalized burn ratio, remote sensing

# Introduction
Consistent geospatial information characterizingthe effects of large wildland fires does notexist for lands within the conterminous UnitedStates, Alaska, and Hawaii. Changing trendsin fire frequency, severity, and size create aneed to acquire data and develop informationthat can establish a baseline for trend analysisand enable scientists to look at recent historicalshifts in post-fire characteristics of burned lands.Furthermore, there is a need to understandthe impacts of fire and resource managementpolicies on fire occurrence and severity.These needs are recognized across agenciesand at several levels within land managementorganizations. Moreover, the general public isincreasingly exposed to information suggestingthat increases in uncharacteristic fire behaviorhave been caused in part by past landmanagement practices. It can be assumed thatpublic interest in current and future fire policywill increase.

The Wildland Fire Leadership Council(WFLC), a national-level interagency bodywith responsibility for implementing andcoordinating the National Fire Plan (NFP) andFederal Wildland Fire Management Policies(http://www.fireplan.gov/), has adopted astrategy to monitor the effectiveness of theNational Fire Plan and the Healthy ForestsRestoration Act (HFRA). One component ofthis strategy is to assess the environmentalimpacts of large wildland fires and identifythe trends of fire severity on all lands acrossthe United States. In 2004, the GovernmentAccountability Office recommended that theForest Service and Bureau of Land Managementdevelop and implement comprehensiveassessments of fire severity to provideconsistent summary information characterizingthe environmental effects of wildland fires andmeet the requirements of WFLC.

## Project Background
In 2006, WFLC sponsored a multi-yearproject to map the fire severity and perimeterson large fires in the United States across allownerships for the period of 1984 through 2010.The project is referred to as the MonitoringTrends in Burn Severity (MTBS) project andis implemented jointly by the U.S. GeologicalSurvey (USGS) Center for Earth ResourcesObservation and Science (EROS) and the U.S.Department of Agriculture Forest Service,Remote Sensing Applications Center (RSAC).This work is an extension of the existingcooperation between these two Centers that hasprovided rapid response burn severity mappingproducts to Forest Service and Department ofthe Interior Burn Area Emergency Response(BAER) Teams.

The primary objective of this project is toprovide burn severity information for a nationalanalysis of trends in fire severity for the NationalFire Plan. Owing to severe periodic droughts,increased fuel loads, and a higher frequency ofuncharacteristic fires in recent years (Arno andAllison-Bunnel, 2002; Westerling et al. 2006),it is essential for the trend analysis to span asignificant period of time to better account forvariability in factors potentially affecting fireseverity, such as climate. Secondary objectivesinclude providing geographic and fire-specificdata for use at regional and sub-regional scalesto support resource and risk assessments,resource management, monitoring, and researchactivities. Data of sufficiently fine spatial andthematic resolution are necessary to support thewide range of operational and research-relatedinformation needs at broader scales.

This project will serve four primary usergroups with one set of data and information:
- National policy makers, such as WFLC, that require information about long-term trends in burn severity and recent burn severity within vegetation types, fuel models, condition classes, and treatment effectiveness;
- Field managers that benefit from GISready maps and data for informing andsupporting pre- and post-fire management decisions and monitoring
- Project managers for existing databasessuch as LANDFIRE and the NationalLand Cover Database that benefit fromburn severity data produced at comparablespatial scales and resolution for validatingand updating geospatial data sets
- Academic and agency researchersinterested in fire severity data oversignificant geographic and temporalextents
## Burn Severity Definition
The MTBS project relies on existing,published terminology to define burn severityin a manner representative of its products.Nevertheless, common fire effects terminologyis often applied inconsistently and usedinterchangeably for significantly differentinformation requirements (Hardy, 2005; Lentileet al. 2006). In order to promote a commonand clear understanding of burn severity as itis characterized by this project, the definitionfor fire severity was taken from the NationalWildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG)glossary. In addition to the baseline definition,clarifying characteristics are provided. Burnseverity within the MTBS project is definedas: “Degree to which a site has been alteredor disrupted by fire; loosely, a product of fireintensity and residence time” (NWCG, 2005).

The following additional statements have been adopted to further clarify the nature of the products developed by this project: 
- Burn severity is a composite of first-ordereffects and second order effects that arisewithin one growing season.
- Burn severity relates principally to visiblechanges in living and non-living biomass,fire byproducts (scorch, char, ash), andsoil exposure.
- Burn severity occurs on a gradient orordinal scale.Burn severity is a mosaic of effects thatoccur within a fire perimeter.
- Longer term effects are controlled byvariables that evolve after a fire and arebeyond the scope of this project.
- Burn severity is ‘map-able’ and remotelysensed data provide a measurementframework.
- It is important for users of MTBS-generateddata to be aware that burn severity products relateprimarily to the effects of fire on vegetationbiomass, particularly in the upper strata. Theseproducts are not intended to be consistent withsoil burn severity data produced by the ForestService and USGS in support of Burned AreaEmergency Response (BAER) efforts.
 
## Project Scope
Burn severity mapping is being conducted intwo time phases. Fires occurring in 2004-2010are considered ‘current’ and will be mappedand reported annually for the entire projectduration. Historical fires occurring from 1984through 2003 will be mapped, analyzed, andreported by mapping zone periodically duringthe project. The United States has been dividedinto geographic mapping zones representingbroadly similar ecological conditions. Mappingzones have been prioritized based on firefrequency, area affected, and data availability.Figure 1 illustrates processing schedules forhistorical fires by mapping zone.

The mapping zones illustrated in Figure1 were created from aggregations of NationalLand Cover Database (NLCD) mapping zonesoriginally derived from Bailey’s Ecologicalsections (Homer et al. 2004). The primarypurpose of the mapping zones is to provideecologically meaningful processing areas thatare also efficient production units. Secondaryconsideration was given to significantadministrative boundaries where they correlatedclosely with ecological unit edges.

## Products
Products for the MTBS project fall intothree categories: remotely sensed imagery, geospatial layers and maps (raster and vector),and summary analysis.

The remotely sensed imagery is composed ofLandsat Thematic Mapper (TM) and EnhancedThematic Mapper Plus (ETM+) images thatform the basis for measuring spectral responseof individual fires. Methods used to processand classify these data will be discussed inmore detail in Section 2. These data have beenprocessed by USGS EROS through the NationalLand Archive Production System (NLAPS;http://eros.usgs.gov/guides/images/landsat_tm/nlapsgeo2.html) and are representative ofthe level and format of Landsat data typicallydelivered to the scientific and operationalcommunities.

A series of geospatial layers make up theintermediate and final products characterizingpost-fire spectral response, burn severity, andfire perimeters. The following are the principaloutputs:
- Normalized Burn Ratio (NBR) calculatedfrom Landsat (pre- and post-fire), 30 mresolution
- Continuous differenced NBR (dNBR)(relative and absolute), 30 m resolution
- Thematic classification of burn severity,30 m resolution
- Fire perimeter based on dNBR (vectorformat)
- Metadata for geospatial data

Analysis outputs are necessarily limited inscope to achieve the primary objectives of theproject. In-depth trend analysis, correlationsto other factors, including climate changeand management practices, and implications for other resources all fall outside the scopeof this project. Formats and resolution ofthe geospatial products are designed to allowflexibility for application to a wide range ofanalysis objectives that pertain to burn severity.Indeed, it is expected (and desired) that thesedata will be used in broad- and moderate-scaleresearch and management activities where aconsistent data record of post-fire effects wouldbe valuable. Typical analysis reports deliveredby this project include:
- Summary of area burned by severityclass
- Summary of area burned by severityclass and vegetation cover type (whereavailable)
- Summary of area burned by severityclass and the presence or absence of fueltreatments (where available)

# METHODS
The methodology used for this projectwas driven by two fundamental requirements:1) the need to develop consistent informationacross all lands within the project extent, and2) the need to develop consistent informationspanning a significant historical period. Basedon these requirements, remotely sensed imageswere considered to be the only cost effectivegeospatial data source to consistently delineateand measure the response of thousands ofindividual fires across a continental extent andmulti-decadal time frame. Many researchershave evaluated the effectiveness of variousscales of remotely sensed data to characterizefire severity (Milne, 1986; Chuvieco andCongalton, 1988; Justice et al. 1993; Kasischkeand French, 1995; White et al. 1996; Fernandezet al. 1997; Patterson and Yool, 1998; Pereira,1999; Sunar and Ozkan, 2001; Diaz-Delgado etal. 2003; Sa et al. 2003; van Wagtendonk et al.2004; Brewer et al. 2005; Key, 2005; Roy andLandmann, 2005; Smith et al. 2005). Scientificand operational precedent exists for the use ofan approach based on remote sensing.

Landsat TM and ETM+ data provide thelongest consistent record of relatively highspatial and spectral resolution data for mappingfire severity. Not only does this record enablethe mapping of historical fire severity, it alsofacilitates the use of time-series approaches forcharacterizing post-fire effects. Landsat datahave been shown to be responsive to relativechanges in above-ground biomass as a result offire (Lopez Garcia and Caselles, 1991; Kushlaand Ripple, 1998; Miller and Yool, 2002; Eptingand Verbya, 2005). More specifically, multitemporal change detection approaches basedon pre- and post-fire Landsat data have provento be a cost effective and relatively accuratemeans of mapping fire severity (Brewer et al.2005). The availability and low cost of Landsatdata were additional factors supporting their usefor a project of this geographic and temporalextent.

Multi-temporal approaches that applyimage ratios and image differencing techniquesto Landsat data have been developed for avariety of assessment objectives. Imageryis commonly transformed mathematicallyinto indices by ratioing one or more spectralcomponents or bands for each pixel. Thetransformation of Landsat data into vegetationindices (e.g., Normalized Difference VegetationIndex) has been widely used to strengthen therelationship between spectral response andvegetation characteristics, and a number of suchindices exist (Lyon et al. 1998). Lopez-Garciaand Caselles (1991) published the first indexspecifically derived to enhance the relationshipbetween Landsat spectral response and burnedvegetation. This Normalized Difference indexwas combined with multi-temporal differencingand subsequently adapted and operationallyimplemented by Key and Benson (2002), whoused it to develop historical fire severity dataand atlases on several National Park Servicelands. This approach has been named theNormalized Burn Ratio (NBR) and has beenused in fire severity mapping efforts by theUSGS and the Forest Service since 2002.

The Normalized Burn Ratio is used toenhance the spectral response of fire-affectedvegetation. The Normalized Burn Ratio iscalculated from TM bands 4 and 7 as: (TM4– TM7)/ (TM4 + TM7) where TM4 representsthe near-infrared spectral range (0.76 -0.90 μm)and TM7 represents the shortwave infraredspectral range (2.08 – 2.35 μm). DifferencedNBR images (post-fire NBR subtracted frompre-fire NBR) are referred to as dNBR images.The differenced pre-fire and post-fire NBRimages result in a fire-related change image thatis classified into severity classes and providesan unbiased basis for analyzing additionalfire effects. Figure 2 illustrates the process ofderiving fire change and severity images fromLandsat data.

The dNBR data have been operationallyused for both rapid response and initialassessments, and for extended assessment andmonitoring (Bobbe et al. 2003; Key and Benson,2002; Gmelin and Brewer, 2002). For initialassessments, imagery acquired immediatelyafter a fire is used to characterize first-order fireeffects on vegetation and soils, and to facilitatethe prioritization of rehabilitation resources.Extended assessments have relied on imagedata typically acquired during the growingseason following the fire in order to capturedelayed first-order effects (e.g., delayed treemortality) and dominant second-order effectsthat are ecologically significant (e.g., initial siteresponse and early secondary mortality agents).Extended assessments are intended to providea more comprehensive ecological indication offire severity than initial assessments. In bothinitial and extended assessments, there is alevel of uncertainty in the characterization offire severity. Pre-fire vegetation conditions andpost-fire management activity influence thenature and magnitude of this uncertainty. Thedecision to use an initial or extended assessmentshould be based on specific managementobjectives.

Based on the scientific foundation in theliterature and on operational precedent, the dNBR approach was selected to characterizefire severity and to delineate fire perimetersfor this project. Extended assessments willbe conducted on forest and shrub ecosystemsand initial assessments will be conducted ongrasslands and specific vegetation communitiesknown to recover from fire within a singlegrowing season. A simple production modelwas developed around this approach to ensuretimely and consistent products. The followingsteps outline the process:
- Fire history database compilation
  - acquisition of fire occurrence records
  - data standardization and aggregation
- Image data selection and pre-processing
  - scene selection
  - pre-processing
  - delivery and archiving
- Fire severity interpretation and perimeterdelineation
  - Normalized Burn Ratio calculationand differencing
  - interpretation and thresholding intoseverity classes
  - dNBR partitioning
  - dNBR fire perimeter delineation
- Stratification and summarization ofseverity information

## Fire History Database Compilation
Existing fire history databases werecompiled into a single standardized projectdatabase that formed the basis for image sceneselection. Fire history sources were generallyfrom Federal agency databases and Statedatabases. In some cases State and Federalagencies have collaborated in developing andmaintaining a single database for State andFederal incidents. Federal agency data areaggregated into the Incident Command Systemdatabase known as the ICS 209 (named afterthe form number used to report incident status),maintained by the National Interagency FireCenter (NIFC) in Boise, Idaho (http://www.nifc.gov/). ICS 209 data make up most of therecords in the MTBS project database. States were solicited for fire occurrence data when itwas uncertain whether the fires were includedin the ICS 209.

The ICS 209 and State databases requiredpreprocessing to ensure data accuracyand consistency. There is some level ofstandardization within ICS 209, but Federalland management agencies have varyingstandards for content, geospatial accuracy, andnomenclature that are reflected in the database.Duplicate records are common because a givenincident may be reported by several agencies,and there are cases of gross geospatialinaccuracies. Similar inconsistencies anderrors have been observed within and acrossState databases. Data were standardized andcorrected as part of the compilation of anMTBS project database. For the purposes ofthis project, standardization was accomplishedby selecting data elements common to thesource databases and not through record editingor manipulation of the source data, except forgeospatial coordinates. Coordinates wereadjusted if a record was grossly and obviouslyincorrect, and a correction could be madeconfidently. The elements that comprise theMTBS fire history database are as follows:
- ID - Unique MTBS ID that include source ID
- Fire Name - Incident Name from thesource database
- Agency - Reporting Agency from thesource database
- Year - Year Occurred from the sourcedatabase
- Start Date - Incident Start Day/Month/Year from the source database
- Reported Area - Incident area from the source database
- Long - Longitude
- Lat - Latitude
- Path - Landsat Path
- Row- Landsat Row
- Disposition - Description of issues relative to a fire’s visibility or spatial accuracy on the imagery

Records for these elements were extractedfrom the ICS 209 and State data sets, andsource links were included to ensure datacould be traced to their databases of origin.The spatial distribution and relative frequencyof fire occurrences across the United States isdepicted in figure 3. Some discrepancies inthe fire records are likely because of omissionsin reporting and error in geographic locationswithin the fire records, particularly in thecentral and eastern United States. The firehistory database compiled by MTBS willbe a geospatial record of fires greater than202 hectares (500 acres) in the east, and 404hectares (1000 acres) in the west.
## Image Scene Selection and Data Pre-processing
Scene selection is driven by the MTBS firehistory database. Scenes are selected using theUSGS Global Visualization Viewer (GloVis)developed by USGS EROS (http://glovis.usgs.gov/). Enhancements were made to GloVisto accommodate the magnitude of effortrequired to select scenes for this project. Theseenhancements, available to all GloVis users,include the ability to load ArcGIS shapefiles inthe viewer to aid scene selection, and to viewscene-specific graphs of seasonal patterns ofvegetation condition to help determine peakperiods of photosynthetic activity, or ‘peak ofgreen’ periods. A shapefile of the fire history for the specific area of interest can be loaded intothe GloVis viewer and analysts use fire locationsto guide scene selection for each fire. Pre- andpost-fire images are selected for each incident.Scenes selected for an extended assessmentare based on ‘peak of green’ condition or asclose in time as cloud-free data are obtainable.Limitations in data availability because ofcloud cover will naturally compromise sceneselections for fires. Northern latitudes will alsobe subject to a shorter period of optimal sceneselection because of low sun angles throughoutlate fall and early spring.

Selected scenes are processed according toexisting USGS EROS protocols. Image dataare geometrically registered, terrain-corrected,and radiometrically corrected using theNLAPS system, and then delivered to EROSand RSAC analysts to be processed into fireseverity information. It is estimated that theMTBS project will acquire more than 7000Landsat scenes, all of which will be availablefor download or on media for a nominal charge.The USGS National Satellite Land RemoteSensing Data Archive will serve as the primaryrepository for MTBS image data. GloVis canbe used to acquire the imagery.

## Fire Severity and Perimeter Mapping
The NBR index is calculated for preand post-fire images as described in section2. Pre- and post-fire images are inspectedfor co-registration accuracy and corrected ifspatial differences are systematic, excessive,and extensive (> 30 meters). NBR images aredifferenced for each fire scene pair to generatethe dNBR. A “relativized” dNBR (RdNBR)is also calculated, using a formula based onthe work of Miller and Thode (2007). The RdNBR data have been shown to have strongercorrelations than dNBR to Composite BurnIndex plot data in some western ecosystems(Thode, 2005; Miller and Thode, 2007). WhiledNBR data and associated analysis are moreextensively represented in the literature andoperational use, RdNBR data have recentlybeen used to report trends in fire severity inthe Sierra Nevada (Miller et al, in preparation)and can be expected to support future analysisin other western regions. The MTBS projectintends to provide data calculated from bothdNBR and RdNBR algorithms to support morelocalized trend analysis. The sequence of datalayers generated is shown in figure 2.

*Ecological Severity Thresholding.* Derivingthe dNBR from Landsat imagery is astraightforward series of objective calculationsrequiring limited analyst interaction and relyingprincipally on automated production sequences.After dNBR is calculated, the process ofdeveloping fire severity and perimeter maps ismuch more dependent on analyst interpretation.The dNBR data are calculated as signed 16-bit integers with a maximum digital number(DN) range of -32282 to +32282. However,the practical range of DN values representingfire-related change and no change is typicallywithin -2000 to +2000. Values increasing fromzero represent greater change as a result ofboth first and second-order fire effects (whichoccur within the fire perimeter). Negativevalues of dNBR indicate a positive vegetationresponse (growth) and positive values indicatea negative vegetation response (mortality). AdNBR image for the Cerro Grande fire (2003)is shown in figure 4a and the associated datarange is shown in figure 4b. The analystevaluates the RdNBR and dNBR data rangeand determines where significant thresholdsexist in the data to discriminate betweenseverity classes. Interpretations of the dNBRand RdNBR data are aided by raw pre- andpost-fire satellite imagery, plot data, and theanalyst’s own experience with fire behaviorand effects in a given ecological setting.Composite Burn Index (CBI) data (Key andBenson, 2006) have been the most commonlycollected ground-based data to estimate postfire effects. Correlations between CBI anddNBR have been used to demonstrate the sensitivity of dNBR to post-fire effects and toestablish numerical thresholds in dNBR datathat discriminate severity categories (Cocke etal. 2005; Key, 2005). When published dNBRrelationships are available, analysts will usethem to guide their interpretations. Limitedinterpolation of plot-based thresholds withinecologically similar conditions are examined.

Thresholding dNBR data into thematicclass values results in an intuitive map depictinga representative number of ecologicallysignificant classes. Within this project, thethematic raster data will characterize severityin five discrete classes: unburned/unchanged, low severity, moderate severity, high severity,and increased post-fire response. A singletheme labeled Non-processing Area Mask isused to identify areas affected by clouds, cloudshadows, and data gaps, specifically the gapswithin a Landsat 7 SLC-off product as describedby the USGS Landsat Project (2007).

Determining thresholds for the burn severityclasses is a significant quality control issue. It is understood that when several individuals areinvolved in mapping burn severity over a widevariety of landscapes that some subjectivity willbe introduced. Consistency in characterizingburn severity is critical to the understanding of long term trends. In order to maintainconsistency of results, a series of fires over awide variety of landscapes have been selectedfor cross calibration of the burn severitythresholds. Each member of the mapping teammaps the series of fires. The results of eachmember of the mapping team are discussed toidentify what the rational was for quantifyingthe thresholds. When feasible, fires withassociated plot data are chosen for analysis.A consensus approach is identified and theresults are registered in a reference database.The mapping team uses the reference databaseas training and validation for mapping firesoccurring in similar conditions. This approachwill provide a practical, intuitive means to sumseverity by area burned across broad scales andthey provide a coarse look at the gradient ofeffects within fires. Finer-scale analysis maybest be conducted on the continuous dNBRdata which provide the greatest range of dataquantifying post-fire change.

Although not a direct measure offire severity,dNBR data have been shown to correlate tofield-based estimations of fire severity (Hudak,2006; Key, 2005). Since these correlations willvary between fires, the grain of continuous dataoffers the most flexibility to evaluate severity atthe individual fire scale. Analysis of multiplefires with continuous data requires the data to benormalized due to variation in reflectance datacaused by inter-annual variation in phenologyand site moisture. Variation due to atmosphericconditions and sensor anomalies are assumedto be corrected through the satellite dataprocessing.

Ecological significance is issue-dependentand one set of thresholds cannot be expectedto apply equally well to all analysis objectivesand management issues. Other severityclassifications such as those described byStephens and Ruth (2005) may be used as thebasis for thresholding, but must be consideredfor the appropriateness of their application to dNBR data. Fire severity classifications thatare based on fire effects not readily discernibleon Landsat data (e.g. subsurface biomasscombustion or soil chemistry changes) shouldnot be applied to these data.

## dNBR Partitioning
In addition to setting ecological thresholdsas a means of discriminating severity classes,dNBR will be arithmetically partitioned intodiscrete classes to facilitate objective andflexible pattern and trend analysis. Arithmeticpartitioning is not intended to provideinformation on the ecological severity offires at large spatial scales or for short timeperiods. Methods for partitioning dNBR haveyet to be determined and the algorithm(s) andsubsequent grain of partitioning will dependon the ability to reveal meaningful patterns infire severity over time. Gmelin and Brewer(2002) used a simple equal interval calculationto establish objective burn severity classesbetween observed unburned and high severityconditions in the Northern Region of the ForestService. Brewer et al. (2005) used the sameapproach in a methods comparison studythat concluded dNBR was the most effectiveapproach of those evaluated for mapping fireseverity. The relative ease and quickness ofarithmetically partitioning dNBR data willallow for rapid evaluation of meaningfulspatial and temporal scales in the context offire severity trends. Moreover, dNBR data canbe efficiently analyzed and classified to suitthe fire severity information needs of a specificmanagement issue.

*Perimeter Delineation.* Fire perimetersare generated by on-screen interpretationand delineation of dNBR images. Analystswill digitize perimeters around dNBR valuesreflecting fire induced change. To ensureconsistency and high spatial precision,digitization will be performed at on-screendisplay scales between 1:24,000 and 1:50,000. Data showing incident perimeters, whereavailable, will be used in an ancillary fashionto aid the analyst. Incident perimeters can beparticularly useful in identifying unburnedislands within a fire or outlining an isolated,disjunct burned area outside the main fireperimeter. Because of limited availabilityand inconsistent spatial precision, incidentperimeters were not considered appropriate asa source for MTBS project perimeters.

## Data Summarization
Tabular data will be generated fromstatistical summaries of the fire severity classlayers. Reporting units will vary in extentdepending on the needs of WFLC, but at aminimum summary data will be producedfor each project mapping zone as well as at anational extent. Three sets of tabular data arecurrently specified in the MTBS product suiteand are listed in section 1.4. Of the three,“area burned by severity class” is the statisticalsummary that is most directly extractable fromthe spatial data.

Summarizing area burned by severityclass and vegetation cover type requiresconsistent geospatial vegetation data of similarresolution. Initial MTBS reporting efforts willuse land cover classes from the 2001 NationalLand Cover Database (NLCD, Homer etal. 2001) for national and State summaries.Other land cover strata, such as the existingvegetation types currently being mapped bythe LANDFIRE program, will offer a spatiallyextensive, nationally consistent, and moredetailed alternative by which severity classescan be summarized.

A composite database containing additionalecological and administrative spatial units,including fourth level hydrologic units(cataloging units) (Seaber et al. 1987) andFederal ownership, will be available to enableusers to summarize MTBS data for larger areas.The production and distribution of the spatialdata sets described in section 2.3 constitute the primary geospatial data legacies availableto scientific and operational interests outsidethis project. Summarization of area burned byseverity class in relation to other geospatialinformation is feasible. For example, theNational Fire Plan Operations ReportingSystem (NFPORS) database is the primarystandardized Federal database containing fueltreatment data in digital format, as described onthe Web site (http://www.nfpors.gov/). Tabulardata generated under these criteria will onlybe applicable to specific administrative andgeographic extents.

## Data Distribution
All spatial and tabular data will bedistributed through Web-based interfaces.Existing data portals maintained by ForestService and the USGS (http://www.mtbs.gov/ and http://mtbs.cr.usgs.gov/viewer.htm)will be primary access points as the data andassociated reports are completed and becomeavailable. Additional distribution nodes maybe developed in partnership with other Federaland academic institutions.

After completion of the first historical datasets, a technology transfer phase of the projectwill be initiated. This effort will educatepotential users about the structure and contentof burn severity data, and explore applicationsof the data at multiple scales. Independentstudies will reveal how useful MTBS dataare and discover limitations that will guideoperational use. The technology transfer phasewill attempt to synthesize internal and externalassessments of data usefulness and provide anefficient means to access these assessments.Web-based tutorials and workshops will beused to engage potential users.

# RESULTS
The MTBS project mapped 347 firesand fire complexes that occurred in 2004,totaling 3,148,212 hectares (7,781,049 acres) nationwide. According to statistics compiledby the National Interagency CoordinationCenter (NICC), a total of 65,461 wildfires werereported in 2004 burning a total of 3,276,402hectares (8,097,880 acres). This numberincreases to 4,323,064 (10,684,784 acres) whenwildland fire use and prescribed fires reportedto the NICC are included. Incident reportstatistics are available at http://www.nifc.gov/nicc/predictive/intelligence/2004_statssumm/2004Stats&Summ.html. A direct comparisonof area burned developed by MTBS witharea burned based on incident reports cannotbe made without recognizing the differencesin how each was derived. MTBS maps firesresulting from all three wildland fire types, butonly maps fires that exceed 202 hectares (500acres) in the east, and 404 hectares (1000 acres)in the west (as reported in national and/or Statedatabases).

Of the 3,148,212 hectares (7,781,049acres) mapped by this project, 39 percent fallinto the high and moderate severity classes.This represents the total area most likelyto have experienced significant ecologicalchange. The percentages of burn severity in2004 for the entire United States and in justthe conterminous United States are shown infigure 6 and 7, respectively. Fire occurrenceand area burned in 2004 were strongly affectedby fire activity in Alaska — nearly 85 percentof the total mapped area occurred in Alaska.The relatively high percentage of missing dataassociated with the non-processing mask areais also driven by the high frequency of imageanomalies and cloud coverage in Alaska.Nationwide, the three most affected levels ofgovernment land ownership are the Bureau of Land Management, State agencies, and the U.S.Fish and Wildlife Service, principally becauseof the high amount of burned area in Alaska,where these three agencies have large holdings(figure 8). Within the conterminous UnitedStates, the affected government ownershipis more evenly distributed, with the ForestService, Bureau of Land Management, and Bureau of Indian Affairs accounting for thehighest proportions of burned area.

The land cover types most affected by fire in2004 were forest and shrublands, again becauseof the high percentage of fire in Alaska. It isexpected that forest and shrublands will accountfor the majority of hectares (acres) affected inany given year, because of dominance of thesecover types in the western United States wheremost large fires occur. However, inter-annualvariation in the proportion of forest, shrub, andherbaceous cover types affected by fire mayvary considerably. Moderate and high severityrepresented 44 percent of the burned area inforest lands, 31 percent of shrub lands, and23 percent of herbaceous lands burned. Theproportions of high and moderate severity by vegetated land cover classes are illustratedin figure 9. The proportion of wildland covertypes affected by fire in 2004 is illustrated infigure 10.

Summary data for 2004 fires are alsopresented for States that experienced firesmeeting MTBS mapping criteria. As previouslynoted, Alaska fire activity was the mostsignificant aspect of wildland fire. The Statesmost affected by fire in 2004 (total area burned)are illustrated in figure 11. When displayedby area of moderate and high severity, thecomposition of the most affected States doesnot change, but ranking changes slightly (figure11). Not all States experienced or reported firesabove the mapping size threshold.

# CONCLUSION
The Monitoring Trends in Burn Severityproject will develop the data and informationnecessary to meet the strategic analysisobjectives of the Wildland Fire LeadershipCouncil and other policy making and firemonitoring agencies. In addition, the projectwill supply a valuable data legacy to supporta broad range of research and operational usesat multiple scales. The first in the series ofannual reports provides insight on the abilityto characterize burn severity over broadgeographic regions. Mapping of the historicalfires and burn severity will enable scientists tounderstand burn severity trends over time. Burnseverity data will help provide a spatial andtemporal framework to better understand theimmediate and longer term interrelationshipsof wildland change agents and risk factors inpost-fire settings.

# ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to thank the individuals responsible for completing the first series of MTBSburn severity products. We also wish to thank the Wildland Fire Leadership Council for sponsoringMTBS and the members of the MTBS Executive Oversight Committee for their guidance andsupport.

Any use of trade, product, or firm names is for descriptive purposes only and does not implyendorsement by the U.S. Government.




