# Ten-years-of global burned area products from spaceborne remote sensing—A review: Analysis of user needs and recommendations for future developments

# Abstract
Early global estimates of carbon emissions from biomass burning were based on empirical assumptions of fire return interval in different biomes in the 1980s. Since then, significant improvements of spaceborne remote sensing sensors have resulted in an increasing number of derived products characterizing the detection of active fire or the subsequent burned area (GFED, MODIS MCD45A1, L3JRC, Globcarbon, GBS, GLOBSCAR, GBA2000). When coupled with global land cover and vegetation models allowing for spatially explicit fuel biomass estimates, the use of these products helps to yield important information about the spatial and the temporal variability of emission estimates. The availability of multi-year products (>10 years) leads to a better understanding of uncertainties in addition to increasing accuracy. We surveyed a wide range of users of global fire data products whilst also undertaking a review of the latest scientific literature. Two user groups were identified, the first being global climate and vegetation modellers and the second being regional land managers. Based on this review, we present here the current needs covering the range of end-users. We identified the increasing use of BA products since the year 2000 with an increasing use of MODIS as a reference dataset. Scientific topics using these BA products have increased in diversity and area of application, from global fire emissions (for which BA products were initially developed) to regional studies with increasing use for ecosystem management planning. There is a significant need from the atmospheric science community for low spatial resolution (gridded, 1/2 degree cell) and long time series data characterized with supplementary information concerning the accuracy in timing of the fire and reductions of omission/commission errors. There is also a strong need for precisely characterizing the perimeter and contour of the fire scar for better assimilation with land cover maps and fire intensity. Computer and earth observation facilities remain a significant gap between ideal accuracies and the realistic ones, which must be fully quantified and comprehensive for an actual use in global fire emissions or regional land management studies.

# Introduction
As early as the 1980s, fire disturbance has been considered as an essential climate variable (ECV) (Crutzen et al., 1979; Crutzen and Andreae, 1990; Hao and Liu, 1994), and later by the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS, 2010) programme as well as by several other internationally coordinated science plans and research programmes. The main goal of current research is to move towards a better understanding of the earth system for more accurate predictions of various feedbacks in the future scenarios of climate change. It is now recognized that fire is one of the most important disturbances for terrestrial ecosystems causing considerable uncertainties in carbon balance, and in the atmospheric composition of reactive gases and aerosols (GCOS, 2011). In many regions of the world, the variability of the terrestrial carbon balance is driven by fire disturbance, including emissions during the burning itself, but also subsequent ecosystem recovery and regrowth, which may take place over long time scales (Mouillot and Field, 2005; Field and Fung, 1999; Chen et al., 2000). Associated carbon fluxes, particles or aerosol emissions in the atmosphere then play a significant role on the global energy balance and subsequent climate trends. Therefore better fire observations and improved estimates of fire impacts will reduce uncertainty and improve prediction for future ecosystem feedbacks on biosphere/atmosphere interactions.

The research on global burned area (BA) remote sensing products started in the late 1980s with the technical work to deliver the global representation of fire number and burned area. Regional analysis of burned areas showed the potentials of middle resolution sensors to discriminate fire-affected areas (Chuvieco and Congalton, 1988; Furyaev, 1985; Milne, 1986; Smith and Woodgate, 1985). Later on, the first studies oriented towards continental burned area assessment were based on NOAA-AVHRR images, both at continental (Barbosa et al., 1999) and global scales in 2000 (Dwyer et al., 2000). Since the year 2000, several products have been delivered using different algorithms and sensors that we will describe in this paper. An unexpected side effects of these BA development has been the increasing use of these global data for regional fire regime analysis where fire statistics are lacking, and representing nowadays a significant community of users. In this context the European Space Agency’s Climate Change Program aims to develop a set of ECV from satellite observations. Within this program the fire cci project is developing methods to generate long-term and global series of BA products adapted to the needs of climate modellers for which global datasets started to be developed, but also land managers or local users when local fire statistics are lacking. To make the final products more useful, the fire cci project started from conducting a user requirement analysis, which was aimed to define the scientific profile of current end-users and their specific needs, covering all source of application, including climate modellers, earth scientists, ecologists and fire managers. The needs of BA information for each user group were defined in terms of coverage, accuracy, resolution, time delivery. This survey was complemented by a literature review, which analyzed the previous uses of BA datasets in the widest range of topics, but including the most representative of climate, carbon and atmospheric models. This paper provides a summary of current global BA data products and their uncertainties, limitations and applications, then presents the summary of the user-needs analysis, based on a survey of more than 47 questionnaires and finally includes a gap analysis for deriving a set of future needs and requirements that will be used to guide the production of global BA products in the next decades.

# Overview of global burnt area data products
Table 1 provides an overview of the global burned area products described in the literature from 1995 to 2010. The following sections will discuss the quality and accuracy of current global multi-annual data sets. For details on regionally or temporally restricted products the reader is referred to the literature cited in Table 2. Even though the products described were developed with different sensors and algorithms, average yearly estimations of global burned area are fairly similar, in the range of 3.50–4.50 M km2, with yearly variations depending on weather conditions.

## GFED (Global Fire Emissions Database)
The Global Fire Emissions Database Version 3 (GFED3) includes estimations of atmospheric emissions derived from a multi-sensor global burned area data set derived by Giglio et al. (2010). These data are provided as gridded product at 0.5◦ resolution and cover the period from 1997 to present and thereby being the longest global burned area record currently available (Giglio et al., 2010). The multi sensor and bias-corrected burned area product has been improved compared with its predecessor GFED2 (Giglio et al., 2006), by using 18 times the quantity of training data for the algorithm implementation. Most input data for the GFED3 was obtained from BA maps generated from the 500 m reflectance channels of MODIS using the direct broadcast (DB) algorithm described by Giglio et al. (2009). This algorithm uses both multitemporal reflectance changes and hotspots derived from the thermal channels. For periods when MODIS BA information was not available, the BA was estimated from a combination of local regression and regional regression trees from active fire data. For the Pre-MODIS era, active fire observations from the TRMM VIRS and ERS ATSR sensors were used, followed by a further correction to ensure consistency with MODIS data. Estimations of yearly global BA from this product range from 330 and 431 M ha with great inter-annual variability.

## MCD45A1
The MCD45A1 data is currently the standard MODIS BA product for Collection 5 Level 3. It uses daily data from both Terra and Aqua MODIS at 500 m spatial resolution. The data set is provided as monthly layers (with the date of BA detection) covering the full period of MODIS operations (2000-present). The MCD45A1 product was generated using an algorithm based on a bi-directional reflectance change detection approach (Roy et al., 2008).

## L3JRC
L3JRC global burned area data (Tansey et al., 2008a,b) has been generated for seven years (April 2000–March 2007) at 1 km from SPOT VEGETATION data. The product was based on a cooperative project coordinated by the JRC (Joint Research Center, Italy), along with other European centres (University of Leicester, the Université Catholique de Louvain and the Instituto de Investigac¸ ão Cientifica Tropical, Portugal). The product was generated by using a set of regional algorithms based on the previous experience of the GBA2000 product (Tansey et al., 2004).

## Globcarbon
The Globcarbon BA product was developed as one of the four land products of the ESA Globcarbon initiative to provide targeted, long-term, suited land products that can be readily merged into earth system models (Plummer et al., 2006, 2007). Global burned area data were generated at spatial resolution of 1 km, 10 km, 0.25◦ and 0.5◦ with monthly temporal resolution, covering the 1998–2007 period. The data were produced by applying two regional GBA2000 algorithms on the 1-km SPOT VEGETATION data, and the GLOBSCAR algorithms on ERS2–ATSR2 and ENVISAT AATSR data. The product includes the estimation of different sensorsalgorithms, as well as a combination of some of them by union and intersection.

## GBS
The Global Burned Surfaces was generated by the European Commission – JRC – Institute for Environment and Sustainability – Global Vegetation Monitoring Unit. It was derived from daily NOAA-AVHRR images using the reduced resolution (8 km) data set. The series includes the period from 1982 to 1999, based on a multitemporal change detection algorithm, as described by Carmona-Moreno et al. (2005). The authors note that their product is likely to miss a large fraction of fire activity due to the coarse resolution of the imagery used. The value of this product lies therefore mainly in the analysis of seasonal trends.

## GLOBSCAR and GBA2000
These two projects served as a benchmark to develop global BA algorithms. GLOBSCAR was developed by the European Space Agency (ESA) and uses daytime data from ATSR-2 instrument onboard the ERS-2 satellite, while GBA2000 is an initiative of the JRC and it was based on SPOT-VEGETATION data. Experiences from these two projects were later used for the Globcarbon and L3JRC projects.

# General overview on the increasing use of BA products reported in the literature since 2000
We investigated the use of global BA products based on a database search of peer-reviewed papers referenced in Web of Science, and filtered according to keywords concerning the names of at least one of the global fire products previously reviewed or their input sensors for local, regional or global applications, in whatever field of research. Our request identified 231 references for the 2000–2011 period, dealing with the developing, validation or use of global BA products used for global or regional studies (synthesis table and references in Annexe 2) and active fire counts. Fig. 1 illustrates the yearly number of references over the decade 2000–2011 using BA products information or related products called “active fire counts” from MODIS or ATSR. Papers dealing with global BA products started in 2000, and their number grew up with 5–10 publications per year evenly distributed between products generated from MODIS, TRMM, ATSR before 2008. Since 2008, the number of publications per year using satellite BA products increased to more than 15 and the majority of publications (65%) relied on data from the MODIS instruments. At the same time, 25 scientific publications use active fire counts, mostly derived from MODIS sensor since 2008, while ATSR was mostly used before that year. It can be concluded that the quality of the MODIS products and their easy acquisition stimulated research related to the fire topic.

We classified the scientific publications using BA products into the following main topics covering different research fields: technical delivery of BA products with their updates (called Earth Observation EO), fire hazard early alarm and survey/penalize systems, BA accuracy analysis or improvement, ecosystems and land management, vegetation models using fire global fire risk assessment modules or fire spread at the regional level, and atmospheric sciences (carbon emissions and aerosols or particles during fire events). The contribution of each of these topics in the literature survey is presented in Fig. 2. Atmospheric chemistry applications remain the dominant application of BA products with 20–50% of the published studies in our sample. Research applications for fire hazard analysis and forest/ecosystem management actually started later in 2006 and cover now a significant end-user group, implying a wider range of requests than global studies alone.

The regional distribution of the published papers shows a significant share of global studies (Fig. 3). Tropical regions follow in importance, particularly in central Africa, the Amazon Basin and SE Asia. This inter-tropical region actually represents more than 60% of the burned area globally (Mouillot and Field, 2005), but most countries in this region do not have operational fire observation systems, and therefore official fire statistics are not very reliable. Additionally, there is a double interest in air chemistry due to the large amount of carbon and aerosols released from these biomes, and a significant demand for forest management and protection from deforestation.

Since 2006, we can observe an increase in the number of research publications dealing with agricultural fires. These low energy fires were not detected in earlier versions of fire products and could not be considered. As of yet, no conclusive analysis has been performed to quantify the contribution of agricultural fires to, for example, the MODIS burned area products. For the purpose of estimating trace gas and aerosol emissions from fires it can be assumed that some overlap exists with bottom-up inventories of agricultural burning that are based on economic statistics.

As a brief summary, the analysis of peer-reviewed research publications highlights the increasing use of MODIS-derived products compared to any other products and the importance of these datasets for the tropics where ground data are lacking. The origin of end-users reflects the increasing accessibility of the dataset to the global community and the increasing independence of these end users in downloading and using these data for local use. We also noticed the significant use of active fire counts rather than BA data, highlighting the interest in high resolution datasets and fire contours. From this analysis, we can expect different user requirements according to the field of application, the extent of the region to be explored, and the country of origin with different expectations and access to the datasets. This analysis also points out that any set of future requirements will be driven by the atmospheric community but will also become closer to the increasing demand for fire hazard and forest managers.

# A literature review on BA product applications
The following section describes the main uses of BA products and tries to summarize their requirements in terms of temporal, spatial and thematic characteristics based on identified gaps and failures.

## Fire hazard assessment for ecosystem management
Fire has both positive and negative effects on the ecosystems and society, but most commonly it is considered as a natural hazard, as it affects people’s lives and properties and ecosystem services. For this reason, fires tend to be avoided and when countries have an active fire suppression policy, fire risk assessment systems are in operation. Accordingly, the identification of the main factors explaining fire ignition and propagation becomes a very relevant research topic. The validation of those fire risk systems requires having accurate fire statistics available. Both fire ignition points and burned areas are required (Ardakani et al., 2011; Chuvieco et al., 2010; Robbins et al., 2008). In savannah-type ecosystems for example, identifying climatic or human drivers as well as frequently burned areas requires a fairly good representation of fire contours (Devineau et al., 2010; Archibald et al., 2009), to promote fire-free areas where fire sensitive species could be conserved. Accurate fire detection with low spatial shifts is then standard requested information for vulnerable areas (Wright et al., 2007; Ressl et al., 2009). Among these vulnerable areas, we could identify a special focus of interest for deforested regions where fire is a major tool for forest clearing. In these regions, however, several authors could deplore some caveats in differentiating fires and other disturbances where reburning and understory fires occur (Van der Werf et al., 2009; Le Page et al., 2008; Pereira, 2003; Morton et al., 2011).

These results are of interest to fire risk modellers at larger scale who need a conceptual knowledge of processes to be implemented in global fire modules or fire spread/initiation models at global (Thonicke et al., 2010) or regional scale (Anderson et al., 2009). Mapping large fire events in continuous forested ecosystems could contribute to a better understanding of their propagation. Requirements here are an accurate timing of fire occurrence on a daily basis and a finer spatial resolution for more precise fire contours. On the other hand, long time series of fire affected areas are necessary for getting a clear picture of a fire regime with time return intervals much larger than the 10 years available until now, so that most studies, until now had to use a combination of products to get the more accurate and longest time series available (Le Page et al., 2008; Bartalev et al., 2007; Bartsch et al., 2009). Providing a single product covering the longest period available would be a major step forward for fire risk assessment users.

## Early warning fire alert systems and survey
The growing impact of catastrophic fire seasons has brought the public interest of establishing near real time fire alert systems. Early warning and fast extinction of fires are the only chance to avoid major negative impacts of fires on society and ecosystems. These requirements have already been listed by Davies et al. (2009) for MODIS products, or have been pointed out in scientific papers (Schroeder et al., 2008). Some efforts have already started to provide this information through active fire detection rather than burnt area (Biswajeet and Hamid, 2010; Zhang et al., 2008). Nevertheless, a major requirement on the improvement of BA product when considering lower spatial resolution getting closer to active counts, would be the timing of the fire signal delivery with low omission errors that could lead to missed alerts with significant consequences. Commission errors would lead to false alerts that are less damageable if they remain in a reasonable proportion.

The political use of fire detection for survey and penalization for illegal fires recently emerged in Bolivia (Redo et al., 2011) or Indonesia (Harwell, 2000). We could also identify the use of fire detection as a proxy for societal conflict in some regions and its application for early warning and rapid response efforts of interest to human rights, humanitarian and security communities, as already assessed for Darfur (Bromley, 2010). This political use of fire information then brings an additional constraint on fire detection accuracy or at least a clear explanation of uncertainties to prevent any responsibilities in false alarms or inaccurate locations that could penalize local inhabitants.

## Atmospheric chemistry
Since the early work by Radke et al. (1978), Crutzen et al. (1979) and Seiler and Crutzen (1980) the interest in biomass burning as major emission source for trace gases and aerosols has gradually increased to become an important focus point nowadays. The underlying data were traditionally derived from national forest fire assessments (FAO, 2001). During the 1990s, continental scale or regional scale studies started to provide remotely sensed spatially explicit fire datasets (Barbosa et al., 1999; Eva and Lambin, 1998a,b). At the end of the 1990s and the early 2000s, the first global fire products became available from global remote sensing, providing a spatially and seasonally explicit distribution of fires and the first studies with fire emissions in atmospheric chemistry models derived from remote sensing data appeared. The aim was to provide an accurate estimate of the interannual variability of combusted biomass and biomass burning emissions (Schultz, 2002) and its seasonal variability (Generoso et al., 2003) in a spatially explicit manner at the global scale. Since then, it has become a de facto standard in atmospheric chemistry models to prescribe trace gas emissions from large-scale vegetation burns. These are based on remote sensing data and an empirical conversion of area burned and average biomass amount per grid cell into carbon and other compounds released into the atmosphere.

Field experiments and laboratory burns of litter material from various ecosystems provided insight into the emission factors for many gases and aerosols (Andreae and Merlet, 2001; Akagi et al., 2011). Due to uncertainties in the burned area provided, maximum and minimum values were delivered. The time period covered was not exceeding 10 years, and they were mainly used in areas where no fire statistics existed, as in the tropics. For regions where fire statistics are available, it has been possible to construct longer time series of fire emissions (Chen et al., 2000; Mouillot et al., 2006; Schultz et al., 2008; Mieville et al., 2010).

Fire emissions can be estimated from two approaches: bottomup and top-down. The former tries to estimate the main factors contributing to emissions from biomass burning, while the latter tries to estimate the actual amount of gas released from the observation of a fire itself or from atmospheric concentrations of that gas. The bottom-up approach has been the most extended, based on the Seiler and Crutzen (1980)’s model:

Mi = A · AFL · ˇ · EFi

where Mi is the emission of compound i (g m−2), A is the area burned (m2), AFL is the available fuel load (g m−2), ˇ is the burning efficiency (i.e. fraction of AFL that is consumed in the fire and released into the atmosphere), and EFi is the emission factor of compound i (gi gDM−1, where DM means dry matter).

Global BA products provide A in the above equation, which can be coupled with spatially explicit estimates of AFL and EF based on vegetation modelling for biomass, litter and its water status. This approach is the basis for the Global Fire Emissions Database (GFED) (Van der Werf et al., 2010).

The alternative estimates of gas emissions are based on a combination of active fire counts and TOMS aerosol optical depth retrievals (Duncan et al., 2003a,b), daily active fires from geostationary satellites (Reid et al., 2009) or – more recently – emissions estimates based on a multi-sensor fire radiative power retrieval (Kaiser et al., 2009).

## Biogeochemical models
The estimation of biomass from before the fire has been sometimes approached from spatially explicit vegetation models that simulate carbon assimilation and respiration, estimating fuel biomass and soil litter loads, their water status and the subsequent dynamic and post-disturbance effects. Until the end of the 1990s, major efforts were focused on conceptualizing models able to simulate the seasonal and inter-annual variations of these fluxes at the global level based on soil and plant functional parameters, and climate (precipitation, solar radiation and temperature). These models can be divided into dynamic vegetation models that simulate intrinsically species composition and the seasonal variation in the canopy layer where NPP occurs, and biogeochemical models that are forced by fixed land cover, fire and soils maps and by the fraction of photosynthetically active radiation (FAPAR) intercepted by leaves, globally estimated by remote sensing and reviewed in Palacios-Orueta et al. (2005). Biogeochemical models are then used for historical short term (over a decade) studies where changes in land cover are assumed to be not significant at a global scale. The CASA model was initially developed for estimating seasonal and inter-annual variability in biosphere/atmosphere exchanges (Potter et al., 1993; Field et al., 1995). The combustion module developed in CASA by Van der Werf et al. (2003) for GFED, and Mouillot et al. (2006) for historical long term fire emissions, accounts for fire effects on changes in carbon stocks, direct emissions from combustion and subsequent indirect effects on the decomposition of woody debris resulting from incomplete combustion (Potter et al., 1998). Emissions (MBB) are calculated for the burning of leaves, wood, and litter carbon pools with specific combustion completeness parameters specific to these pools and to the biomes. Combustion completeness is then modified according to soil water content, the driest conditions being the more complete. Biome-BGC (Running and Hunt, 1993) is also a widely used model for forest ecosystems, and has a range of global and regional application but has rarely been used in global fire studies (Wang et al., 2011). Fire-BGC (Keane et al., 1989), the stand level forest model designed for fire application is the mostly used BGC derived model implying fires but mostly at the landscape scale.

When applied at global scales, vegetation models require a spatially explicit representation of burned areas as a forced input for calculating combustion. Biogeochemical models require the accurate location and timing of fires for a better simulation of fire emission and combustion efficiency and further use in atmospheric models. We will note here also the importance of multi-year datasets, as a single year for BA product is not relevant due to the high interannual variability and indirect effects of previously burnt areas on present fuel biomass. However model requirements in terms of BA specificity are still low compared to the current resolution of spaceborne sensors with global coverage, as simulations are performed at 0.5◦ or 1◦ resolution and on monthly basis.

## Dynamic Global Vegetation Models (DGVMs)
DGVMs simulate water, energy and carbon exchanges between the terrestrial biosphere and the atmosphere, but instead of using a fixed land cover derived from global remote sensing, they can simulate the global distribution of vegetation dynamically so that land cover (species composition and biomass) is calculated from climate and soil types that allow the germination, growth and survival of species (Sitch et al., 2003). Indeed they can be used under historical and future climate change scenarios. In these models, the fire module calculates direct and indirect carbon emissions from combustion as in the biogeochemical models, but also the potential changes in species composition according to the functional traits associated to resistance to fire and post fire regeneration (Pausas et al., 2004). In these models, fire information can be either inserted from global remote sensing datasets as in the biogeochemical models for historical fire emission assessments, but they have also been associated with the development of fire risk modules based on more or less complex processes able to reproduce fire hazard based on climatic and anthropogenic ignition and fire spread. A review of existing DGVMs and their related fire modules are presented in Table 3. Identifying processes and validating the simulated fire hazards both use global BA product. Landscape fire succession models (LFSM, see Keane et al. (2004) for a review) simulate fire spread at finer scale for local applications but cannot be used yet for global studies due to computer resources and the lack of data for wind downscaling in time and space that drive fire spread (Arca, 2007; Duguy et al., 2007). Only few studies yet applied global fire products for coarse resolution fire spread assessment (Anderson et al., 2009; Loboda and Csiszar, 2007).

For the fire modules embedded in DGVMs, requirements from fire information are fairly coarse, as these models are not able to simulate the exact timing of fires due the high contingency of fires events, but can simulate an average fire regime that has to be compared with actual data. Seasonality, fire number and fire size are the only information requested by this community but validations are usually performed at the biome level or “ecoregion” rather than pixel to pixel so the accuracy in the fire location and date of the burning is low. BA products are used as calibration dataset for fire hazard modules, or as a validation dataset to estimate the validity of these fire modules globally.

Getting a better accuracy on burned areas, exact location and timing is of course a challenge that suits all the vegetation modellers requests as model resolution will increase. However this performance in accuracy has to be closely linked with better performance in land cover mapping as emissions are a function of the burned area, but also by the biomass available for burning. Usually a single land cover map is used e.g. Global Land cover GLC2000 (Bartholome and Belward, 2005), but recent studies pointed out the discrepancy between these products particularly for low density tree cover (Herold et al., 2008; McCallum et al., 2006), and efforts are still ongoing for increasing accuracy for land cover maps in vegetation models (Lawrence and Chase, 2007).

# Temporal and spatial accuracy of current BA products
## Current weaknesses and failures: a review of evaluation and inter-comparison of BA products
Most peer-reviewed papers reviewed in our analysis identify the benefits of BA products where local ground based statistics are lacking. However, comparisons with high resolution datasets highlight their limitations to characterize small fires (Sa et al., 2007), with a threshold of 105 ha for Hawbaker et al. (2008) or 120 ha for Giglio et al. (2009), or low intensity fires, which are frequent in shifting cultivation (Miettinen et al., 2007) or shrubland fires (De Klerk, 2008). Omission and commission errors have been requested early in the BA product development process (Korontzi et al., 2004) and remain a key variable to account for. For example, accuracy of existing BA products range between 70% and 80% (Kushida, 2010; Diagne et al., 2010; Loboda et al., 2007; Schroeder et al., 2008) but can fall down to 40% in some biomes (Giglio et al., 2009) or when using coarser resolution sensors (such as NOAA-AVHRR). Since AVHRR is the only sensor available from 1982 to 1997, finding a balance between length of the time series and accuracy defines the framework for new forthcoming BA products.

As soon as the first BA products have been built and delivered independently, intercomparison exercises could point out the general agreement for the global fire distribution across biomes but with major discrepancies when comparing databases pixel to pixel (Boschetti et al., 2004; Simon et al., 2004; Tansey et al., 2004). Identifying discrepancies between products could point out biomes with more significant weaknesses to account for in modelling error assessments and summarized in Table 4. Also, specific studies could identify signal disturbances as heavy clouds during the fire season, depending on data processing algorithm (Roy et al., 2005; Giglio et al., 2009) more or less robust to the presence of clouds.

Based on these acknowledged discrepancies between different BA products that are part of the fire detection procedure, Simon et al. (2004) stressed the need for precise user requirement for matching the needs with the technology when necessary. The current BA products limitations reviewed here already bring the technical limitations that have to be overcome before launching finer resolution datasets (De Klerk, 2008).

In addition, to refine the acknowledged caveats of existing BA products, recent technical studies aim at developing and testing new outputs, that reveal requirements expected by endusers as fire energy (Boschetti and Roy, 2009; Ellicott et al., 2009), low intensity fire for crop residue burning (Punia et al., 2008), fire temperature and fire size (Eckmann et al., 2008), or a better fire detection in the tropics (Peng et al., 2008). These requests should be considered carefully for algorithm development and output delivery for a further extensive use of the BA product.

Finally, the latest technologies for advertising, communicating, accessing data and early warning of product delivery, have to be considered interacting with already existing users, but furthermore for a user community not linked with recent fire research activities, as performed by the MODIS team (Davies et al., 2009; Trigg and Roy, 2007).

## Forthcoming targets for BA products: a review of requirements identified by previous international science programmes
Several international science plans/programmes dealing with global fire assessment produced a set of target requirements for fire observation. Here we reviewed the currently undergoing key internationally coordinated science projects/plans that covered the topic of fire. In this section, we extract accuracy targets expressed by the recommendations of the following programmes/reports1: GCOS-138 (GCOS, 2010, 2011), GTOS T13 (GTOS, 2009a,b), GEO Carbon Strategy (Ciais et al., 2010), IGOS Carbon Theme (Ciais et al., 2004), IGOS Land Theme (Townshend et al., 2008), NASA Fire ESDR Whitepaper (Justice et al., 2011) (http://landportal.gsfc.nasa.gov/Documents/ESDR/Fire Justice whitepaper.pdf). Existing BA products caveats have been identified and desired requirements for the fire disturbance observation were provided and summarized in Table 5. The table includes information from six international programmes. The details of target fire observation requirements in these programmes are quite different, with GCOS-138 covering much more detailed information, while GEO carbon strategy having only a brief statement.

Nevertheless, it should also be confirmed that, a core set of characteristics for global burned area products can be extracted from the proposed requirements by these projects. The global burned area data must be or have:
- Long-term series data for understanding the long-term fire, climate and vegetation interaction. These series can be generated from various sensors but temporal consistence should be assured.
- Temporal stability and consistency, within 5%
- Temporal resolution, daily data with original spatial resolution of the sensor, weekly, 10-day or monthly basis on global scale.
- Spatial resolution, originally 250 m (or minimum 500 m), horizontal resolution 1 km acceptable, 0.5 degree or higher resolution on global scale.
- Accuracy: highest standard 5% (maximum error of omission and commission), with demonstrated systematic and adequate validation using internationally agreed validation protocol.
- Error tractability and uncertainty characterization, in a manner that can be easily understood and utilized by users in various applications.
- Easy access to data, including auxiliary information and metadata on vegetation cover, burn severity etc.

These general recommendationsare not linked to existing capabilities (or those available in the near future from planned satellites). Again in some programme reports or documents, it’s pointed out proposed requirements can only be met under certain conditions with existing observing system and cannot be met in a systematic way. Therefore the final conclusion would be the design of new burned area data must be centred on these core characteristics or aimed for the highest standard in each characteristic, but with current capabilities, they will not be met systematically.

We found that fire information requirements from global spaceborne observations in international science programmes take into account existing capabilities and give some recommendations for improved fire products in the future. But it also should be noted that partly due to the lack of coordination between these programmes (and to their different objectives) their specific requirements vary significantly. In some programmes, only brief mention is made of specific requirements of burned area products. Also there is generally a lack of complete and in-detail linkage between the recommended requirements and the existing capabilities, or the capabilities that will be available in the near future from planned satellites. Nevertheless a core set of characteristics for global burned area products can be extracted from the proposed requirements by these projects. Getting a continuous time series of BA beginning in 1982 when the first AVHRR data are available is recognized by most programmes as critical to get a better understanding of fire – vegetation interactions. This “requirement” implies a temporal stability and consistency between sensors. Once this main goal is achieved, the second most important “requirement” is the need of daily temporal resolution and 250 m or better spatial resolution over the globe. This would be the next goal with secondary products aggregated at a weekly or monthly time step and 500 m, 1 km or 0.5◦ resolution would be fine for most applications. To decrease misuse of this BA products, bias and random error should be better characterized and documented as well. The design of new burned area data must be centred on these core characteristics and aimed for the highest standard in each characteristic.

# Identification of requirements for forthcoming BA products: a questionnaire to end-users
## Questionnaire format
We designed a questionnaire (Annexe 1) aiming at identifying and defining requirements for specific applications of burned area products in order to deliver the product consistent with the users’ needs. This questionnaire was sent to targeted end-users from the authors of published papers using BA products, and refines the outcomes of the literature review. End users were classified according to their working country, the field of research they are involved in and their use of BA products within the categories earth observation (EO), modelling (MOD), data assimilation (DA), and other.

In the design of the questionnaire a balance was sought between identifying the “ideal” needs of a user (i.e. irrespective of the technical possibilities that satellite data can principally offer) and the “realistic” needs which take into account the physical limitations of existing sensors. Several questions were directed towards specific product types that can be generated from the remote sensing data. A set of seven pre-defined product types were listed as “plausible products” and users had the opportunity to formulate different product characteristics or add requirements to the pre-defined set. Five product types were gridded data sets with different spatial and temporal resolution, the other two were “burned patches” (i.e. a list of individual fire events or fire perimeters) and “burned pixel” (i.e. a list of individual satellite sensor pixels classified as burned) data sets. For each type of proposed product an extensive set of possible quality flags and metadata information was suggested and users were asked to rank them in terms of importance for their work.

The questionnaire assessed various accuracy requirements with respect to the burned area detection and quantification, the geolocation and the timing of fire events and the temporal stability of the product. For each aspect of product accuracy, the users were asked to give their requirements for three categories: “ideal” (wish I had this), “reasonable” (would be good if they can do this) and “minimum” (if it is any worse then it becomes useless). These terms can be interpreted similar to the GCOS terminology of “target”, “goal” and “threshold” objectives. User requirements concerning the completeness and robustness of burned area (or fire) detection were queried by asking for acceptable omission and commission errors, respectively. Finally, the users were asked about the file format, metadata conventions and data delivery mechanisms and their preferred way to access the data.

## End-user description
A total of 47 end-users answered the questionnaire. The majority of answers were from researchers working in Europe, followed by people working in North America and South America. Two responses each came from Asia and Australia. This geographical distribution mimics the origin of authors found in the literature survey but with a larger representation of European researchers (Fig. 4a). Among these users, 15 belong to the earth observation (EO) community, 17 to the modelling (MOD) community, 4 to the data assimilation (DA) group and 11 to other areas of expertise, in accordance with the field of research distribution in the literature survey (Fig. 4b).

The MOD + DA responses exhibit a focus on carbon cycle monitoring and dynamic vegetation modelling, whereas scientists working in the field of atmospheric chemistry tend to belong to the OTHER group. At the interface between the MOD + DA and EO communities are applications related to species migration and the production of land-cover maps. BA products are also widely used for fire hazard monitoring and assessment of post-fire conditions. Besides the mainstream applications asked for in the questionnaire, burned area products may be used in many fields of research in accordance with the bibliographical review of application. About 50% of users specified the satellite fire products they have been working with in the past and provided comments on the major advantages and disadvantages of these products. The majority of fire products that are presently in use are derived from MODIS, confirming the results from the bibliographical analysis. In the MOD + DA community, several users employ the GFED products (v2, Van der Werf et al. (2006), and v3, Van der Werf et al. (2010)). In the EO community preference is given to the Giglio et al. (2009, 2010), Dempewolf et al. (2007) or Roy et al. (2008) products. Alternatively, the respondents developed their own retrieval products based on MODIS, SPOT/VEGETATION, NOAA/AVHRR or Landsat data. Only few users employ ESA data and if they do, they generally use fire hot spot products rather than burned area.

Main advantages of the currently available fire products are their free availability and the fact that they can be obtained through fast mechanisms of delivery. However, the majority of current products are reported to fall short of the desired accuracy and spatial or temporal resolution. Furthermore, most existing products provide only information on hot spots and have no information on BA. In the case of GFED products the major advantage pointed out by the users is that it has a long time series. The major disadvantages associated with GFED are the ASCII data format, and the fact that this product is not available in real time. In the case of the Giglio et al. (2009, 2010) products, the major advantage and disadvantage is, respectively, the good performance and the lack of global coverage.

## Product requirements
### Type of data products
Fig. 5 shows the score-ranking of the proposed pre-defined product types. Clearly, the users give preference to data products that allow identification of individual fires or regional-scale applications (i.e. relatively well-resolved gridded products). Researchers with coarser resolution models generally prefer gridded products, while scientists applying models at the regional or landscape scale prefer more detailed burned patch or fire pixel information. While several people responded that they prefer to have the option of downloading a coarser-scale product in order to limit the data volume and processing, most say that they would also accommodate the finer resolution products. Requirements on projection and coordinate system used converged towards the lat/lon coordinate system.

### Accuracy requirements
The highest quality standard for the BA product appears as key requirement for future BA products (Table 6). While there is considerable spread from more stringent to much more relaxed quality objectives, the general consensus for the accuracy requirement is: ideal = 5% error, reasonable = 15% error, minimum = 25% error. There is no obvious relation of these requirements to the users’ model resolution. The dependence of accuracy requirements on scale was mentioned in Roy et al. (2006). Therefore, the questionnaire asked for the required level of accuracy for regional BA and for each single fire. Requirements were tighter for regional BA (10% error) assessments as the users for single fires admit the difficulties to shape fire, even with low resolution images (20% error). When classifying errors into omission and commission errors, several users stated that a certain omission and commission error is acceptable as long as they are both similar. However, the majority of users want to see slightly more stringent requirements applied to commission errors (ideal = 3.7%, reasonable = 10.6%, minimum = 17.1%) than to omission errors (ideal = 4.4%, reasonable = 13.1%, minimum = 19.1%). There is no discernible trend of accuracy requirements with model resolution.

### Geolocation
The question about acceptable geolocation errors provoked rather different responses from the different user communities. Contrary to expectations, the modellers and data assimilation people expressed more stringent requirements than the EO community. Geolocation is of primary importance when the severity of individual burns shall be assessed or when satellite data are being used in realtime to guide fire fighting measures. In the context of earth system modelling (including atmospheric chemistry, carbon cycle and dynamic vegetation modelling), the exact location of a fire is of lesser importance. However, the attribution of a fire to a specific vegetation class (and in smaller scale applications also the orography of the area in which the fire occurred) can matter. Thus, the amount and quality of metadata information that is provided with the fire data will define how well the geolocation of fire pixels must be known. Average user responses indicated a geolocation accuracy requirement of ideal = 1100 m, reasonable = 2900 m, minimum = 6000 m.

### Timing
Users want to be informed about the timing of fire events and they want to know the uncertainty of this quantity. In contrast to the acceptable geolocation error, the MOD + DA communities are prepared to accept a larger timing error (ideal = 2.3 days, reasonable = 6.1 days, minimum = 8.8 days) than the EO community (1 day). This reflects the large proportion of carbon cycle and dynamic vegetation modellers in the MOD + DA community who are less concerned about specific atmospheric transport events. Regarding the temporal stability of the data product quality, less than 15% variability was expected in order to make reasonably accurate assessments of actual fire variability.

### Quality indicators
The user responses on desired quality indicators are summarized in Table 7. The major concern for all product types is the demand to know which vegetation cover is affected by fires. Date of burn and burn severity are of particular interest to the MODDA community while the EO community requests more technical information about the retrieval.

Burned pixel products are primarily of interest to the EO community. These users specifically request metadata information on shadow or smoke contamination and accuracy. Furthermore, they would like to know the probability that a pixel has burned rather than a simple categorization into burned/unburned. The number of observation days, type of fire, index of vegetation moisture content and pixel value of channel 3.9 m were listed as additional requested information.

For burned patches products, clearly the most important information is the burned area itself, but most users also want to know the location and time of burning (start and end time) and burn severity. Some interest was also expressed for information concerning the temporal variability of burns within the grid cell. More specific information on the number and sizes of fires within a specified burned area were thought of moderate importance to most users, but ranked relatively high for users at the local scale.

### Data format and product dissemination
Among the four proposed data formats ArcGIS shape files, ASCII, HDF5, or netCDF, none stood out as being either strongly favoured or absolutely inadequate for the majority of surveyed users. As some users indicated no interest in ArcGIS or ASCII files, while others do not want to deal with HDF5 or netCDF data, it is recommended to make BA products available in at least two different formats, one from each “family”. The responses to the questions about metadata specifications were rather indifferent, albeit several users indicated that the ISO19115 metadata standard with extension to raster format should be adhered to. Most users prefer access to the data via web download or ftp. There is only moderate interest in internet-based mapping or web coverage services and on-demand access is generally not regarded as an attractive option.

### Free-form comments
By means of asking the users about the ideal BA product characteristics if there were no restrictions of any kind we wanted to identify the most pressing needs for sensor improvements and test if these are consistent with the relative importance of quality objectives addressed before. Remarkably, the answers were very similar. Many users think there is a lack of high resolution (geostationary) satellites with appropriate sensors for fire monitoring in terms of active fires and mapping of burn scars. These platforms should be equipped with a thermal sensor that does not saturate at typical fire temperatures in order to derive near realtime information about burn severity indices and fire radiative power.

# Conclusion on recommendations for BA development and use
We reviewed here the state-of-the-art sources of information related to global burned area applications. From this analysis, we could identify the wide range of end-users, covering research fields outside of the initial goal of these global BA product, mostly focussed on biosphere/atmosphere interactions, and highlighting the increasing use for land management. Based on this result, we then compiled and synthesized the requests for further BA developments for increasing both the fields of research where these data could be used, and a better accuracy when these data are already used in their present form. We could then provide a synthesized understanding of user requests according to their research interests, the technical limitations to cover these needs and how ongoing project had to find a balance to provide the best-we-can-do product for satisfying most users.

For most fields of research, we identified the need for an increasing length of the time-series with the most consistency across time and successive sensors, as far as errors of commission and omission are conserved or decreased compared to existing products. Fire being a stochastic event, longer time series would provide a more comprehensive fire regime at the regional level for identifying key processes for land managers (as in Moreira et al., 2011) and global process-based fire models (Thonicke et al., 2010). Longer time series will also allow to account for long-term feed backs of fire disturbances on the global budget, as for instance biomass recovery and the its related carbon sink (Chen et al., 2000; Field and Fung, 1999).

Increasing space and time resolution appear as a second goal to reach as we observe the significant use of active fire counts at high resolution, and should be closely linked with refinement and better accuracy on land cover products. Meeting these requirements will help to fill the gap between the status quo and the desired characteristics of fire observation data that may allow more systematic monitoring of fire activity and more accurate estimation of fire emissions. Reaching this goal will also enhance the use of this product in the increasing research community dealing with landscape management plans in fire-prone areas where fire contours are lacking. This includes landscape planning for the reduction of fire risk and subsequent impact on populations, wealth and health, as well as conservation planning.

Therefore, it is recommended that the development of new global burned area data should take into account the target requirements proposed in this study, acknowledging of course the constraints of available observing systems. This review also highlighted the importance of the uncertainty assessment that should be part of forthcoming fire emissions estimates, so that an easy access and fully comprehensible understanding of these uncertainties should be provided. This latter information started to be accounted for in global fire emissions models (Giglio et al., 2010), but still sparsely used at the regional level. We recommend data providers to highlight and describe the uncertainties of their products, and land managers working with these datasets at the regional level with pixel based information to make use of this uncertainty information to prevent any misinterpretations of the data.

The growing topic of increasing accuracy in earth observation products, now relies more on uncertainty assessment by comparing existing datasets (Herold et al., 2008; Frei et al., 2012; Pfeifer et al., 2012), merging products to account for this uncertainty (Knorr et al., 2012) or new algorithm allowing for temporal consistency between sensors across time, leading to similar approaches used for the pre-satellite era where uncertainties are even higher (Mouillot and Field, 2005; Meiyappan and Jain, 2012).









