
# Abstract
The assessment of burn severity is highly important in order to describe and measure the effects of fire on vegetation, wildlife habitat and soils. The estimation of burn severity based on remote sensing is a powerful tool that, to be useful, needs to be related and validated with field data. The present paper explores the relationships between field accessible variables and Relative Differenced Normalized Burn Ratio (RdNBR) index by using linear mixed-effects models and boosted regression trees, based on data from 28 large fires and 668 field measurements across three countries in southern Europe. The RdNBR clearly reflected the mean height of charred stem and loss of ligneous, living shrub and tree cover during the fire. The paper confirms that remote sensing indices provide an acceptable assessment of fire induced impact on forest vegetation but also highlights there are important between-fire variations due to specific contexts that modify these relationships. These variations can be effectively assessed and should be taken into account in future predictive efforts.

# Introduction
Fire is a key ecological process in many forested areas, and its variation in size and severity strongly influences forest structure and wildlife habitats. Large amounts of data are required to define post-fire management plans, either at strategic or tactical level. In this context, remote sensing is a necessary and reliable tool for providing spatially continuous information about the state of forest ecosystems, associated resources and for assessing their evolution overtime.

Remote sensing-based assessments have gained relevance in natural resources management as they are much less time-consuming than assessments entirely based on field inventories, while reducing uncertainties associated with inference and estimation from sample surveys in areas showing fine-scale heterogeneity. In addition, these assessments have also proved their validity to improve the retrieval of representative field data through stratification methods. Currently, a variety of remotely sensed images are available for providing information about forest ecosystems by a range of airborne and satellite sensors, from multi-spectral to hyperspectral sensors, with different spatial and temporal resolutions.

The use of multispectral images has also represented an important step ahead for the impact assessment of forest disturbances; specifically, to assess wildfire impact, as it has become an essential source of data to map burned area. In this context, burn severity has become a key variable in order to assess the impact of fire on forest ecosystems and can be defined as the loss of soil and aboveground organic matter in a burned area, being used to analyze non-immediate fire effects. Burn severity has been mapped through indices such as the Normalized Burn Ratio (NBR) considering the absolute difference change detection protocol (dNBR), or as a relative difference (RdNBR). These indices combined with other metrics derived from available satellite multi-spectral images have been used for mapping burn severity in several studies related to large fires.

Researchers and managers use these remotely sensed assessments and field data to describe and measure the fire effects on vegetation, wildlife habitat and soils, and improve the understanding of fire regimes, the successional pathways and the hydrogeomorphological effects of fires. In addition, on regions where fire is a common threat, as on the northern part of the Mediterranean basin, forest managers require a fast and accurate estimation of burn severity to map and assess fire damages across different landscapes. However, burn severity indices coming from remote sensing data, while accessible, need to be translated into forest variables to be properly understood by forest managers. For this purpose, it is required to compare the burn severity indices coming from remote sensing data with field measures of burn severity to identify reliable relations. These relationships have been reported as either linear: by using the Composite Burn Index (CBI) or its modified version GeoCBI; or as nonlinear: as in Parks et al.; Soverel et al. and Van Wagtendonk et al..

CBI is an operational methodology developed in the USA for burn severity assessment, which provides a good field assessment of fire severity. It has been demonstrated, however, that may require modifications to better adapt to specific ecosystems (De Santis and Chuvieco, 2009). It is clear that the impact of fire on forested areas depends on fire intensity and time of residence, as well as the tree capacity to protect sensitive tissues, which is related to the species and size of each single tree. This aspect is especially relevant when delayed responses to fire need to be accounted, as each tree responds differently to the same fire intensity depending on its size, species-dependent physiological traits and time lapse from the fire event. These result in a different spectral response and, thus, a different burn severity value that needs to be adjusted. Although CBI and modified versions of the severity index, have shown their utility, further studies are required to understand the relations between remote sensing derived indices and ground data, in order to be applicable to large and heterogeneous landscapes consisting on a wide variety of vegetation types. A first step to test this can be the evaluation of the relationships between a remote sensing derived index and field-based measurements of severity; to identify how each individual severity indicator is related to the satellite index, and afterwards to test whether combined also produce a clear satellite signature without major correlation problems. A limited number of studies have investigated the empirical relationships between remote-sensing indices of burn severity and field data in the context of the Mediterranean Basin, even though it is a region heavily affected by forest fires, and characterized by a high variability of vegetation and fuels across its forested landscapes.

The present paper seeks to evaluate the performance of the satellitederived indices as continuous metrics of burn severity. For this purpose, we tested their correspondence to variables measured in the field, from several fires and we built simple and robust explanatory models to consider linear (linear mixed-effects models) and non-linear effects (Boosted Regression Trees (BRT)), based on data from twenty-eight fires across three countries from Southern Europe, aiming at: (1) assessing correlations among field explanatory variables and RdNBR; and (2) analyzing the burn severity variability among the studied fires and the random effect of each fire event.

# Material and methods
## Data sources
### Studied fires
In this study, we analyzed the area burned by 28 forest fires that occurred along the period 2006–2008 in south-western Europe, entailing the south of France, Portugal and both continental Spain and the Canary Islands (Fig. 1). Overall, these fires burned 24,869 ha including agricultural fields, grasslands, shrublands, and forests dominated by conifers, broadleaves, or mixed forests. The fire size ranged from 42.7 ha to 14,649 ha (able 1). The areas covered a high range of forest types in relation to their tree canopy cover and species composition. The main conifer species in the burned areas were Pinus pinaster Ait., P. halepensis Mill. and P. canariensis Chr. Sm. Ex DC in Buch, while the most common broadleaves were Eucalyptus sp. The area is characterized by annual mean temperatures ranging from 11.9 to 16.9 °C, annual precipitation from 514 to 962 mm and elevation from 61 m a.s.l. to 1521 m, reflecting high variability.

### Field data
Information about the extent of wildfires occurred in the European Union is recorded in a standardized database. In order to add data about burn severity of fires larger than 50 ha, a manual field assessment was created to be used by the European Member States named Field Assessment of Forest Fire Severity (ForFireS). Ground-based burn severity data, measured as the loss of ground and aboveground biomass after the fire, was collected in twenty-eight fires by surveying a total number of 668 inventory plots following a systematic squared grid and the ForFireS methodology. The number of plots varied according to the area burned by each fire, with a mean of 23.2 plots by fire (standard deviation = 5.5). The plots were circular with an area of 500 m2.

We created a dichotomic variable to characterize the land use in the selected plots (Forest = 1, forested areas; Forest = 0, agricultural or other areas). For each forested plot, the following variables were measured indicating the state of the plots prior to the fire (measured when possible and reconstructed from stumps and nearby unburned plots when fully combusted) and after the fire (measured) as potential candidates for the statistical analysis (Table 1): mean diameter at breast height (Dm); mean tree height (Hm); maximum, minimum and mean bark char height (CHAR); herbaceous cover after the fire (Herbs); basal area (G); living ligneous cover (SHRC), dead ligneous cover (LIG) and tree cover (TREEC) before and after the fire and the corresponding difference (loss) between both periods due to the fire effects; mean slope, aspect and elevation of the plots; dominant tree species and vegetation type (conifer or broadleaved). Note that one of the detailed variables (LIGloss) had discontinued records and was not measured in all plots (N = 241). The variable named ligneous cover and its loss due to fire was defined as the combined shrub and tree cover, from 0 to 100%, with the intention of measuring the coverage by woody plants. We also created the dichotomic variable Firetd in order to consider the time between the burn severity assessment and the field work. Firetd is equal to 0 for Initial Assessment plots (IA, plots measured between two or three months after the fire occurrence), and 1 for Extended Assessment plots (EA, plots measured during the next year's campaign).

## Satellite image collation and processing and RdNBR calculation
The remote sensing index for assessing burn severity was based on Landsat 5 and 7 satellite imagery, with observations after and before the fires. We collected the closest available images to the fire occurrence and to the field work. Based on these, we computed the Normalized Burn Ratio (NBR) at 30 m resolution using the Landsat NIR and SWIR bands (4 and 7, respectively) and the Relative Differenced Normalized Burn Ratio (RdNBR) to assess burn severity in the burned areas. The RdNBR is a variant of the Differenced Normalized Burn Ratio (dNBR) that considers the relative amount of pre-to post-fire change by dividing dNBR by the pre-fire NBR value. This index was proposed to remove the bias due to the pre-fire vegetation type and density. The RdBNR showed a normal distribution although with long tails in both sides; therefore, the values were restricted to −500 to 1500, excluding 18 observations, to ensure a more stable analysis of the relations between the different variables.

## Methodological approaches
A preliminary analysis was performed on all the considered variables, in order to identify strong correlations between RdNBR and ground data. The selection of variables included the following criteria: the variables must be available and easy to retrieve, must have a good predictive power, have a physical or biological meaning, and in case they are combined, they should present a limited multi-correlation.

Two modelling approaches were taken to establish the relationships, aiming at different applications: on the one hand, based on linear regression in order to produce models that could be easily applied and understood and, on the other one, based on Boosted Regression Trees (BRT), in order to produce the highest predictive power with the variables available.

The linear regression models were constructed by a mixed model approach, since the variables were grouped according to fire event, reflecting a hierarchical structure. To simplify the modelling methods, the resulting random factor was applied to the intercept. In addition to the criteria used for variable selection, in this case the variables should have no obvious biases or dependencies in the predictions, had to be significant at the 0.05 level, and the resulting models had to be parsimonious and avoid excessive complexity, since the ultimate objective was to observe the relationship of the variables, and not a full predictive model.

The resulting models under this approach were evaluated quantitatively by examining the magnitude and graphical distribution of the residuals for all the variables included in the model, aiming at finding obvious dependencies that indicate systematic discrepancies. The accuracy of the model predictions was determined by calculating the bias and precision, based on the absolute and relative estimates of bias and RMSE, as well as the coefficient of determination.

With all candidate variables used in the mixed models, an alternative analysis was performed based on BRT. This approach combines statistical and machine learning techniques aiming at the improvement of the performance of a single model by fitting many models and combining them for prediction (Schapire, 2003). In this case, the modelling approach allows the use of incomplete data, does not take any assumption about the shape of the relationship of the variables and the predicted, permitting multiple interactions.

In this case, besides the selection of variables to be included in the models, the models are defined by additional parameters: number of trees, learning rate (or shrinkage, related to the reduction of the impact of any additional tree), bag (random fraction of the residuals is selected to build the tree, per iteration) and number of interactions between variables. The number of trees was estimated through optimization (Ridgeway, 2006) and for the other parameters, several models were tested sequentially, being alternative learning rates fixed ranging from 0.8 to 0.001, and the number of interactions from 1 to 5.

The models and statistical analysis were developed in R version 3.2.4. The BRT models were based on the dismo extension of the gbm package. The mixed models were estimated using the nlme package.

# Results
The preliminary analysis showed a significant correlation between the considered variables and the RdBNR. The strongest correlations were for the variable LIGpre and LIGloss (R = 0.59 and 0.57, respectively) and CHARH, CHARHmean, TREECloss, SHRCloss (R = 0.44, 0.40, 0.37, 0.12, respectively), with the rest presenting lower correlations. For the dummy variables, both Firetd and Forest showed a high explanatory power (Fig. 2).

As expected, correlations between the independent variables were found (LIGpre and LIGloss; CHARH and CHARHmean) and, based on this, a subset of variables was selected by considering those variables presenting better results for the statistical models. One of the variables that showed the highest relationships in the preliminary analysis (LIGloss) had discontinued records (N = 241), which limited the use of the rest of the data since mixed models require complete cases to be fitted. Therefore, two alternative models were fitted, with LIGloss being substituted with surrogate variables (N = 650).

The final models considered under this approach were:

where RdNBR is the response variable related to LiGloss, TREECloss, SHRCloss, CHARH, Forest, TFire all as defined in Table 1. Subscripts i and j refer to measurement i in fire j, β1-βn are the parameters to be estimated, μj and εij are independent and identically distributed random between-fire and between-measurement factors, with mean equal to 0 and constant variances σfire and σobs, respectively.

All variables included in the linear mixed-effects models (Eq (1) and Eq (2)) were statistically significant at p-value < 0.05. The linear regression mixed models presented a coefficient of determination for the random and fixed parts of 0.67 and 0.61, for Eq (1) and Eq (2), respectively. When only considering the fixed part, these values decreased to 0.60 and 0.41, respectively, as a large percentage of the variability was explained through the random factor (Table 2), reflecting the differences due to specific conditions related to the fire event. Concerning the BRT approach, the best model used a learning rate of 0.01, 5 interactions and 550 trees. In this case, the coefficient of determination was 0.56, but it was reduced to 0.45 when it was estimated using a cross-validation approach (Fig. 3).

Concerning model assessment, there was not observed strong systematic biases in the predicted RdNBR and the values of the variables. (Fig. 4), although in Eq (2), the use of TREECloss tend, to some extent, underestimate the RdNBR. The bias was −2.749 (−0.72%) and −1.471 (−0.38%) for Eq (1) and Eq (2), respectively, and −0.045 (−0.012%) for the BRT model (RMSE = 218, 245 and 211, for Eq (1), Eq (2) and BRT, respectively). In the case of the BRT approach, it failed systematically to produce RdNBR estimates below −67. The marginal effect on RdNBR of each single variable included in the statistical analysis was determined from partial dependency plots, which showed the effect of each variable on the response after accounting for the average effects of all other variables for the linear mixed models and with one, three and five interactions for BRT. All relationships were largely consistent along the modelling approaches (Fig. 5).

The effects on RdNBR increased with increasing values of CHARH and LIGloss, following a linear trend. A similar effect was found considering TREECloss, although in this case, the values of Eq (2) slightly resulted in higher RdNBR than in the BRT approach. For SHRCloss there were divergences between the mixed models, which accounted for a positive relationship, and the BRT estimates, which identified a negative threshold after 80%. In the BRT estimates, alternative values in the number of interactions, learning rates or number of trees used in the calibration, did not alter the nature of the relationships.

Regarding the dichotomous variables Forest and Firetd, the effects on the independent variable were higher in plots measured in forest areas between two or three months after the fire occurrence. The estimated contributions of these variables were highest for CHARH and LIGloss (average over 20%) and the lowest for SHRCloss (average less than 5%), suggesting the explanatory effects of the latter could be explained by combinations of the other variables. It must be taken into account that the weights slightly changed with the number of interactions, which was particularly affecting the weights of Forest (decreasing till 6% for 5 interactions) and SHRCloss (increasing till 7.3% for 5 interactions).

# Discussion
The present study addresses the empirical relationships between a burn severity index derived from remote sensing and field data based on 28 fire events in several countries. Due to the large areas entailed by fires, the use of Landsat based indices fits the purposes of the analysis, as their spectral and spatial resolutions make them particularly suitable for assessing burn severity. Particularly, the RdNBR has been used to a large success. But for their use, it is crucial to calibrate it with field variables, in order to analyze the performance of remote-sensing outputs and to assess their accuracy. Most of studies combining field data with remotely sensed assessments of burn severity used the CBI, or adaptations like the GeoCBI, as these indices were designed to define burn severity ecologically, and to measure ground effects visually at each vegetative strata on large and heterogeneous plots. The results of these relationships were statistically satisfactory in most of these studies.

However, the integration of multiple variables in a combined index makes the specific assessment of these relationships difficult. In this study, we aimed to analyze the relations of the different specific field variables (based on the ForFireS assessment) in order to better understand the information that these indices are reflecting, therefore using RdNBR as the response variable subject to study. As expected, the variables reflecting fire intensity (as mean bark char height, CHARH), or burn severity, (as loss of tree, ligneous and shrub cover, TREECloss, LIGloss and SHRCloss, respectively), were positively related with RdNBR, indicating a loss of above ground biomass and reduced photosynthetic reflectance by living biomass, similar to other studies comparing field indicators and satellite indices on burn severity. Topographical factors, that were not significant in this study, have a clear influence on fire behavior although the association between topography and burn severity cannot be generalized for all ecosystems and regions due to the prevalence of determined local conditions on the studied regions (for instance, variation on humidity between different elevations and aspects), or how the slope influences fire behavior (higher slopes increase the rate of spread and intensity, but usually reduce the residence time of fire). Burn severity is expected to be more severe in coniferous forests than in broadleaved forests but in our study it did not appear as significant variable. The pre-fire tree species composition could play an important role in determining post-fire reflectance and recovery and, subsequently, burn severity. It is clear that, depending on the fire intensity and the specific response of the tree species to fire, different ecosystem responses such as resprouting and regeneration can be expected or be accentuated as time goes on. Such variation on vegetation characteristics not only defines an immediate response to fire, but also ecological responses overtime. Even more, the season of the year when each fire takes place is expected to influence the initial fire severity, and delayed vegetation response.

The results confirm that remote sensing indices provide an overall acceptable assessment of the fire induced impacts on the forest vegetation, which can be translated into estimates of biomass lost even when predictive models are applied across large and heterogeneous regions. Yet it must be taken into account that the interactions between fire season, vegetation types and ecological responses, among others, would require of adjustment factors. This specific adjustment was addressed by including a random factor, which included specific conditions of each fire in a mixed-effects approach. In fact, the statistical analysis showed the important differences between fire events on the RdNBR response, suggesting that even if general relations can be inferred for any type of forest, specific variations on such relations are to be expected for each fire event as it is characterized by a specific fire behavior, due to topography, weather, and fuel arrangement. The vegetation composition and development stage prior to fires is also expected to vary between fires, especially when fires are allocated across a large and highly variable region such as the South Europe plus the Canary Islands.

In addition to the general differences on the RdNBR response depending on field measured burn severity, the use of BRT showed that the relationships are not necessarily linear and that there are several interactions between the measurements of severity and their reflection in the RdNBR values. BRT is a useful statistical technique for analysis of ecological data because non-linear effects and interactions are mechanically considered due to trees are invariant to transformations of the predictors and interactions are automatically included. This is very suitable for complex analysis as it allows addressing the relationship among the explanatory variables and the predicted variables with nearly no assumptions. Although the results of the used of BRT were largely consistent with the mixed model approach, this analysis revealed that the relationship with loss of shrub cover during the fire could be over-estimated in the models. It must notice that the use of BRT does not account for between-fire differences in the same way that is handled by a mixed model.

Finally, a factor influencing the relation between ground measurements and RdNBR were the time lapse between the fire event and the remotely sensed burn severity assessment. The impact of the elapsed time could be derived from the RdNBR sensitivity to ash cover which declines with time since fire and the regeneration and response of vegetation after the fire. In that sense, as the time since fire increases, the usage of fire severity measures taken on the field to generate burn severity indexes and relate them to satellite derived images may arise problems, due to the concept of burn severity itself and the increased impact of ecological responses. In order to reduce this time, Quintano et al. combined the use of Landsat 8 OLI and Sentinel-2A MSI data with the dNBR index and its relative version because Sentinel-2A MSI provides higher spatial and temporal resolutions and can be used in case of unavailability of a prefire or a post-fire Landsat images. Although the authors showed that this approach can be adequate for postfire management intervention, the accuracy of burn severity maps was lower than the maps exclusively created with Landsat imagery.

The results of this study provide an assessment of relevant variables that should be prioritized when designing field inventories to assess burn severity, especially when a strong relation is found between satellite derived data and the real impacts of fire on forests. Note that fire may also damage soils, a variable that was not measured and correlated in this study. The study has confirmed that the time lapse between the fire event and the severity assessment influences not only the correlation but the interpretation of the severity concept, and therefore, a careful adjustment of the time lapse must be performed according to the objectives of the analysis. On late assessments, the growth of herbs and bushes may play down estimations on tree mortality, whereas early assessments can miss relevant processes, as delayed mortality, plant recovery through resprouting, or recruitment of smaller plants protecting soil against erosion. A satellite assessment on fire severity should be therefore planned according to the expected use of the obtained information, and always try to reduce potential misinterpretations by evaluating the post-fire response traits of the affected species, either trees, bushes or herbs.

# Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the Joint Research Center (European Commission) for allowing the analysis of data used in this manuscript and Oscar García for their constructive comments. We also acknowledge funding from MINECO (Ref. PTQ-15-07588, RYC-2011-08983, RYC-2013-14262, AGL2015-67293-R MINECO/FEDER, DI-14-06953) and from CERCA Programme/Generalitat de Catalunya.
