
How does disturbance shape Canada's forests? Canada's forests are periodically affected by natural disturbances such as fire, insects and drought. These disturbances can impact and renew entire forest landscapes and, over time, will influence forest composition, structure and biodiversity. Natural disturbances vary in severity, extent and frequency. All together, these characteristics define the natural disturbance regime of a particular region. Natural disturbances constantly change Canada's forests and are part of a dynamic landscape.  Natural disturbances vary from one region to another Natural disturbance regimes vary from one region to another within Canada. For example, spruce budworm outbreaks are most prevalent in the balsam fir forests of eastern Canada while wildfires burned more areas annually in the boreal forest and the taiga in central Canada. Some disturbances are specific to a particular tree species (e.g. mountain pine beetle affects only pine species) while others can affect the whole landscape (e.g. fires) thus resulting in specific ecological dynamics. Disturbance severity can strongly vary. with some being stand-replacing (e.g. crown fires) and others causing only partial mortality (e.g. surface fires). Disturbances have important ecological and socio-economic impacts Extensive stand mortality caused by natural disturbances can have succession through the release of nutrients from affected trees and the reduction of competition among surviving and newly establishing trees. Conversely, natural disturbances may have negative impacts on forest ecosystems or the people, communities and businesses who rely on forests. Exotic or non-native insects and diseases introduced through global trade (e.g. emerald ash borer, asian longhorned beetle) can
