SUBSLIKESCRIPT
Movies
TV Shows
Home Tv shows Young Sheldon s1e14 - Potato Salad, a Broomstick, and Dad's Whiskey - script
Search
YOUNG SHELDON (2017–…): SEASON 1, EPISODE 14 - POTATO SALAD, A BROOMSTICK, AND DAD'S WHISKEY - FULL TRANSCRIPT
Sheldon and Missy are left home alone for the first time when Mary takes a job as a church secretary.


 

♪ This little light of mine ♪

♪ I'm gonna let it shine ♪

♪ Let it shine, let it shine ♪

♪ Let it shine ♪

♪ Everywhere I go ♪

♪ I'm gonna let it shine ♪

♪ Everywhere I go ♪

♪ I'm gonna let it shine... ♪

MARY: Well, I am happy to report that my potato salad is once again the hit of the potluck.

GEORGE: That's great, honey.

MARY: I feel bad for Pam Staples. No one's touching her potato salad.

YOUNG SHELDON: If you feel bad, then why are you smiling?

MEEMAW: 'Cause sometimes your mommy's a big ol' hypocrite.

[CHUCKLES]

JEFF: Howdy, Coopers! How we doing today?

- Pastor Jeff.
- Thank you, Pastor Jeff.

JEFF: Y'all remember my wife Selena.

MEEMAW: Hi, Selena.

GEORGE: Oh, yeah.

SELENA: ¿Qué tal?

GEORGIE: You're married to her?

JEFF: Why, yes, I am.

GEORGE: You can think it... You don't need to say it.

MARY: How are you liking Medford, Selena?

SELENA: [BAD SPANISH ACCENT]: ¿Cómo te gusta Medford?

JEFF: She likes it fine.

MARY: Oh.

_

JEFF: She needs to use the little girls' room. Mary, could I talk to you for a second?

MARY: Sure.

JEFF: Don't worry. I'll bring her right back.

GEORGE: Wasn't worried, but okay.

JEFF: Okay.

YOUNG SHELDON: His Spanish is terrible. That's not what she said at all.

MEEMAW: Oh.

JEFF: I don't know if you've heard, but our church secretary, Elizabeth Sohinki, is currently seeking treatment for a little problem with... shall we say... Under-the-counter medications.

MARY: Oh. So that rumor's true.

JEFF: Mm-hmm.

MARY: Well, she did always seem extremely alert.

JEFF: Alert, shaky, sweaty. Anyway, we need someone to step in and fill the position. I was wondering if you might consider it.


MARY: It's not just bookkeeping. I'd be in charge of handling the maintenance issues... you know, plumbing, electric, what have you. And I'd also head the planning committee for all the social events, which, of course, includes the big three: baptisms, weddings, funerals. And here is the cherry on top. The sign in front of the church with all the clever sayings...

GEORGE: "Be an organ donor, give your heart to Jesus"?

MARY: Exactly. Guess whose job it would be to write those.

GEORGE: Yours.

MARY: Already working on a couple. Listen to this.

[EXCITED CHUCKLING]

MARY: "The best vitamin for a Christian is B1."

GEORGE: What?

MARY: You know, be one. Like be a Christian. And also B1 the vitamin.

GEORGE: Well, now that you explained it, it's funny.

MARY: Yeah. Might be a thinker. But there's a lot more where that came from.

GEORGE: What about the twins?

MARY: Well, I'll still get 'em off to school every day. And when they get home, Mom can keep an eye on 'em till I get back.

GEORGE: Think she'll go for it?

MARY: Are you kidding? She loves 'em like crazy.

MEEMAW: Fat chance.

MARY: Oh, come on.

MEEMAW: You come on. I'm in the prime of my life. I got my water aerobics and my salsa dancing and my bowling league.

MARY: But you love your grandchildren.

MEEMAW: I love ice cream, too, but I don't want to eat it from 3:00 to 6:00 five days a week.

MARY: Well, I'm very disappointed.

MEEMAW: And I'm fine with that. Why don't you just get a babysitter?

MARY: Kinda defeats the purpose of making extra money.

MEEMAW: Oh, yeah, right. All right, let's think about it. Georgie.

MARY: Football practice. And I don't trust him when I'm home.

MEEMAW: Oh. Okay, now, what are we talking about here?

MEEMAW: Sheldon is intelligent and responsible, and Missy... is his sister. I think they'll be fine home alone all by themselves for a couple hours after school.

MARY: You think?

MEEMAW: I do. As a matter of fact, I actually think it'll be great for them. These kids today are so coddled, I honestly think y'all are raising a whole generation of sissies.

MARY: Is that the way you speak about your grandchildren?

MEEMAW: Yes.

♪ Nobody else is stronger than I am ♪

♪ Yesterday I moved a mountain ♪

♪ I bet I could be your hero ♪

♪ I am a mighty little man ♪


[DOOR CLOSES]

GEORGE: Hi.

MARY: How'd it go with your mom?

MARY: She's not interested in watching 'em. Doesn't want to give up her afternoons.

MARY: Of course. Sorry.

GEORGE: You know what, it's okay.

MARY: The timing wasn't right. Maybe when the kids are older.

GEORGE: Okay.

MARY: [SIGHS] I guess I'll go get dinner started.

GEORGE: How about this? Go ahead and take the job. Yeah, if it turns out Sheldon and Missy can't look out for themselves for a couple hours after school, then... well, we'll cross that bridge when we come to it.

MARY: Are you sure about this?

GEORGE: Yeah. Actually, probably good for 'em. Teach 'em a little responsibility.

MARY: That's exactly what my mom said.

GEORGE: Really? Well, I still like the idea.

MARY: Mmm.


MARY: Thank you, God, for this food we're about to receive, and for the nourishment of our bodies, and bless the hands that prepared it.

ALL: Amen.

MARY: So, kids, we have a little family business to discuss.

MISSY: You're pregnant?

MARY: No.

MISSY: We're getting a puppy?

GEORGE: No.

MISSY: I'm not sure I care.

MARY: Starting next Monday, I'm gonna take a full-time job at the church.

YOUNG SHELDON: Well, who's going to take care of us?

MARY: Well, nothing will change in the morning... I'll make breakfast, take you both to school. Then, after school, you'll come home, do your homework, watch TV, play with your toys till I come home around 6:00.

YOUNG SHELDON: Well, why can't Meemaw take care of us?

GEORGE: 'Cause she's not the person you think she is.

MARY: George...

GEORGIE: You're really gonna leave these two alone?

MARY: Yes.

GEORGIE: That's a brave choice.

GEORGE: Look, this job is important to your mother. We expect you both to step up and be responsible.

YOUNG SHELDON: I can do that.

GEORGE: Missy?

YOUNG SHELDON: I'm thinking about it.

GEORGIE: Very brave.


MARY: Okay, let's go over it one more time. House key's under the plastic owl by the front door. There's after-school snacks in the fridge. One for each of you. Emergency numbers are right there by the phone. First aid kit is in the hall closet. [SIGHS] And you won't be needing it, but under the kitchen sink is a fire extinguisher.

MISSY: Ooh, that looks fun.

MARY: For fires only, and don't be starting one just to use it.

MISSY: [WHISPERING] It's like she can read my mind.

YOUNG SHELDON: Don't worry, Mom. We'll make you proud.

MARY: I know you will, baby.

GEORGE: All set for your first day?

MARY: I believe I am.

GEORGE: Mm.

MARY: Mwah.

GEORGE: Mwah. Go get 'em.

GEORGIE: Thanks for waking me up.

MARY: I woke you up 40 minutes ago.

GEORGIE: Well, you didn't do a very good job.

GEORGE: Bye, y'all.

GEORGIE: [GROANS]

[DOOR CLOSES]


PEG: Okay, yeah. Yeah. Okay, later.

MARY: Sorry to bother you, Peg, is Pastor Jeff available?

PEG: Jeff! You available?!

JEFF: On the phone.

PEG: He's on the phone.

PEG: [COUGHING]

PEG: [WHEEZES, COUGHS]

MARY: You know, my mother's had some luck cutting back on the smoking by chewing that nicotine gum.

PEG: Got some right here.

MARY: So you do.

PEG: [CHUCKLES]

JEFF: Come on in.

PEG: Go on, you heard him.

PEG: [COUGHING]

MARY: Thank you.

MARY: Hey, hey.

JEFF: Hey, Mare. Uh, you finding everything you need?

MARY: Oh, you bet. So, I've been going over the books, and I think we have enough money in our budget to purchase a personal computer to handle all the church business.

JEFF: Okay. [CHUCKLES] Well, uh, why don't you leave the paperwork here, and I'll-I'll take a look at it.

MARY: Of course. That's for your perusal.

JEFF: [CHUCKLES]

MARY: Everything okay?

JEFF: What? Yeah. Right as rain.

MARY: All righty. Hey, if you have a minute, I would love to talk to you about the sign out front.

JEFF: Yeah, sure.


MISSY: So far so good.

YOUNG SHELDON: Hello?

MISSY: Anybody?

YOUNG SHELDON: They weren't kidding.

MEEMAW: Maybe I'll just have one little peek.

MISSY: How come you're not eating your snack?

YOUNG SHELDON: I prefer my snack to be a reward for homework well done.

MISSY: You're like an old person.

YOUNG SHELDON: Thank you.

MISSY: What's your homework? Non-Euclidean geometry.

YOUNG SHELDON: How about you?

MISSY: "Symonyms."

YOUNG SHELDON: You mean synonyms.

MISSY: I'm pretty sure she said "symonyms."

YOUNG SHELDON: Did you see that?

MISSY: Someone's out there.

YOUNG SHELDON: Oh, no. They're in the backyard.

MISSY: What do we do?

MEEMAW: Aah!

[ALL SCREAMING]

MEEMAW: Would one of you please get me a towel?

YOUNG SHELDON: Why were you sneaking around out there?

MISSY: Yeah, you scared us.

MEEMAW: I was checking up on you two. And in case you're wondering, you scared me back.

YOUNG SHELDON: Well, why didn't you knock?

MEEMAW: Because you two are supposed to be doing this on your own.

MISSY: And you don't think we can.

MEEMAW: Of course I do. I'm the one who told your mother that you were fine by yourselves in the first place.

YOUNG SHELDON: Then why were you checking up on us?

MEEMAW: That's called being two-faced.

MISSY: We'll be okay on our own.

YOUNG SHELDON: Yeah, we need to prove we can do this.

MEEMAW: All right. I respect that. And I'm happy to keep this little incident a secret.

MISSY: Really? I'm telling everyone. It was hilarious.

MEEMAW: I'm going bowling.

[DOOR OPENS, CLOSES]


JEFF: When we first started dating, everything was wonderful.

MARY: That's when it is wonderful.

JEFF: All the problems started once we got married.

MARY: Well, marriage will do that to a relationship.

JEFF: I-I got Selena a credit card to make small purchases for the house.

MARY: You know... 

JEFF: [STAMMERS] coffee maker, DustBuster. You know what she did? She went to that Sharper Image store and she bought a massage chair.

MARY: Oh, I sat in one of those at the mall. It was terrific.

JEFF: It's $2,000.

MARY: Oh. Well, seeing as I know how much you make, you can't afford that.

JEFF: I... uh-uh.


ADULT SHELDON: Of all the afflictions that can befall a child, one reigns supreme. Beyond scraped knees and paper cuts, nothing strikes fear into the hearts of kids around the world like a splinter.

YOUNG SHELDON: [DISTORTED]: No!

(TV: Tell me why you were pretending to have amnesia.)

YOUNG SHELDON: I've got a splinter!

MISSY: So?

YOUNG SHELDON: So, it's an emergency! Call Meemaw!

MISSY: Oh, calm down. We can take care of this.

YOUNG SHELDON: No, we can't!

MISSY: Sheldon, if we can't handle a little splinter, they're never gonna leave us alone again.

YOUNG SHELDON: You're right. So, what do we do?

MISSY: Let me see it. Oh, boy. That's a deep one.

YOUNG SHELDON: Hey, it's throbbing really bad.

MISSY: Mom would take it out with tweezers.

YOUNG SHELDON: Well, where would we find tweezers?

MISSY: Let's see what we got. Band-Aids... cotton balls. What's "gowz"?

YOUNG SHELDON: It's gauze, and the fact that you don't know that is not filling me with hope. Where would Mom keep the tweezers?

MISSY: Sometimes she uses a needle on splinters.

YOUNG SHELDON: No. No needles. Anything but needles.

MISSY: Wait, she has tweezers in her makeup bag. She plucks her eyebrows with them. And sometimes her mustache.

YOUNG SHELDON: Anything?

MISSY: Nope. Wait. Maybe they're in her room.

YOUNG SHELDON: We're not allowed to go in Mom and Dad's room.

MISSY: Want me to get the needle?

YOUNG SHELDON: [WHISPERING]: Let's make this quick.

MISSY: Why are you whispering?

YOUNG SHELDON: That's how people speak when they're being naughty.

MISSY: I wouldn't know. I'm naughty all the time. You're really not coming in?

YOUNG SHELDON: No. But you're doing great.

[SIGHS]

YOUNG SHELDON: What's wrong?

MISSY: This really is naughty.

YOUNG SHELDON: I told you.

MISSY: I don't see anything. There's just a Bible and a flashlight.

- [PHONE RINGING]
- [SCREAMS]

[SCREAMS]

MISSY: What do I do?

YOUNG SHELDON: Answer it but sound calm.

MISSY: Hello.

GEORGE: Hey, it's Dad. How you guys doing?

MISSY: We're great.

GEORGE: Glad to hear it.

MISSY: I'm watching TV, and Sheldon's reading quietly.

[SIGHS]

GEORGE: I knew you could handle this. I'm proud of you.

MISSY: You know what? I'm proud of us, too.

Uh... [CHUCKLING]: Okay, baby doll, I'll be home in a couple hours. Stay out all night. We got this.

GEORGE: Wha... Love you, too.

[CHUCKLES SOFTLY]

MISSY: That was intense.

I don't think I'm cut out for this latchkey life.

- [PHONE RINGING]
- [BOTH SCREAM]

MISSY: You answer it this time.

YOUNG SHELDON: I can't, I'm supposed to be reading quietly.

MISSY: Answer it, Sheldon.

YOUNG SHELDON: Well, I'm not going in there. Hello. Cooper residence. Sheldon speaking.

MARY: Hey, Shelly.

YOUNG SHELDON: Oh, hello, Mom.

MARY: How's your day going? Shelly? Shelly? You there?

YOUNG SHELDON: Yes, I'm here. She wants to know how my day's going.

MISSY: Say it's going good.

YOUNG SHELDON: I can't say that.

MISSY: Why not?

YOUNG SHELDON: It's bad grammar.

MISSY: How are you supposed to say it?

YOUNG SHELDON: "It's going well."

MARY: Oh, that's nice. I've got to get back to work, but I love you and miss you very much.

YOUNG SHELDON: Okay. I handled that really well.

[DIAL TONE]


[KNOCKING ON DOOR]

JEFF: Got a minute?

MARY: Sure, come on in.

JEFF: I just wanted to apologize. I-It was wrong of me to unload my personal business on you. Here it is, your first day and all.

MARY: Oh, that's fine. Always happy to lend an ear.

JEFF: Great, 'cause I didn't tell you everything.

MARY: Really? 'Cause you told me a lot.

JEFF: This morning, while Selena was in the shower, I went through her purse and I took the credit card.

MARY: - Oh, my.

JEFF: Now, do you think that's stealing, or is it doing the right thing? You know, saving us from bankruptcy and whatnot?

MARY: Wow. Um, yeah, that's complicated. Um... going through her purse... Probably wrong, but on the other hand... well, there is no other hand. You can't be doing things like that and have a healthy marriage. Why don't you just talk to her? Explain your financial situation?

JEFF: That...

MARY: Oh, we're closing the door now, okay.

JEFF: That's not so easy.

MARY: Because of the language barrier?

JEFF: That, and I implied, when we were dating, that I was... well-to-do.

MARY: Oh, Pastor Jeff, why would you do that?

JEFF: You saw her. Uh, she is the kind of woman that can make a man do bad things.

MARY: Well, I... I don't know what to say to that. [EXHALES] Maybe you ought to pray on it.

JEFF: You're right. You're absolutely right. [CHUCKLES SOFTLY] I'll do that now.

MARY: I'll do the same.

JEFF: Thank you.

[DOOR OPENS]

MARY: God, please give me the strength to not spread this juicy gossip about Pastor Jeff. [QUIETLY] Amen.


[SIGHS]

MISSY: What are you doing?

YOUNG SHELDON: I'm reading quietly, so I don't have to lie about it later.

[GASPS]

MISSY: Found 'em.

YOUNG SHELDON: The tweezers?

MISSY: Mom's needles and her magnifying glass.

YOUNG SHELDON: Absolutely not.

MISSY: Let me at least try.

YOUNG SHELDON: No.

MISSY: You're being a baby.

YOUNG SHELDON: Nothing you can say will change my mind.

MISSY: What if it gets infected and turns green and they have to cut it off?

YOUNG SHELDON: I think it's numb.

MISSY: Great, put your hand out.

YOUNG SHELDON: Wait, how do you plan on sterilizing the needle?

MISSY: Mom uses a lit match.

YOUNG SHELDON: We're not allowed to play with matches.

MISSY: What else would work?

YOUNG SHELDON: Alcohol.

MISSY: Stick your finger in there. I'll do the needle.

YOUNG SHELDON: Okay. I hope I don't get drunk.

MISSY: How long till you're sterile?

YOUNG SHELDON: I don't know, but I'm getting lightheaded.

MISSY: No matter what happens, hold still.

YOUNG SHELDON: I can't do it.

MISSY: Yes, you can.

YOUNG SHELDON: No, I can't.

MISSY: Just let me get it.

YOUNG SHELDON: What if you slip and stab me in the eye?

MISSY: I'm not gonna slip. Who always wins when we play... [GASPS] Be right back.

ADULT SHELDON: In 1989 the Milton Bradley Company had dozens of board games on the market, but only one where you were the doctor. Operation came complete with a red light-up nose, 13 plastic body parts for players to remove and, most importantly, one pair of genuine tweezers. My sister performed a medical procedure using a children's board game, while I bravely sat very still.

[EXHALES]

ADULT SHELDON: I guess you could say there were two heroes that day.

(TV: Gee, how do you suppose that happened?)

MARY: Hello?

MISSY: In here.

MARY: Why does the kitchen smell like whiskey?

YOUNG SHELDON: Ask her.

MARY: Oh, dear Lord!

MISSY: Wait till you hear what I did to Meemaw.

(TV: Our show came at number one.)

